
On Touching—The Inhuman That Therefore I Am (v1.1)
karen barad
When two hands touch, there is a sensuality of the flesh, an exchange of warmth, a
feeling of pressure, of presence, a proximity of otherness that brings the other nearly as
close as oneself.1 Perhaps closer. And if the two hands belong to one person, might this
not enliven an uncanny sense of the otherness of the self, a literal holding oneself at a
distance in the sensation of contact, the greeting of the stranger within? So much happens
in a touch: an infinity of others—other beings, other spaces, other times—are aroused.
When two hands touch, how close are they? What is the measure of closeness? Which
disciplinary knowledge formations, political parties, religious and cultural traditions,
infectious disease authorities, immigration officials, and policy makers do not have a
stake in, if not a measured answer to, this question? When touch is at issue, nearly
everyone’s hair stands on end. I can barely touch on even a few aspects of touch here, at
most offering the barest suggestion of what it might mean to approach, to dare to come in
contact with, this infinite finitude. Many voices speak here in the interstices, a cacophony
of always already reiteratively intra-acting stories. These are entangled tales. Each is
diffractively threaded through and enfolded in the other. Is that not in the nature of
touching? Is touching not by its very nature always already an involution, invitation,
invisitation, wanted or unwanted, of the stranger within?
I am struck by the intimacy of feminist science studies’ engagement with science.
Immersion, entanglement, visual hapticity, ciliated sense, the synesthetic force of
perceiving-feeling, contact, affective ecology, involution, sensory attunement, arousal,
response, interspecies signaling, affectively charged multisensory dance, and remembering
are just a few of the sensuous practices and figurations at play in feminist
science studies.3 Feminist science studies distinguishes itself in two intra-related ways:
First and foremost, for all the varied approaches, foci, and philosophical commitments
that go by this name, for all its diversity and because of all its diversity, it is a richly
inventive endeavor committed to helping make a more just world. Second, and relatedly,
it distinguishes itself by its commitment to be in the science, not to presume to be above
or outside of it. In other words, feminist science studies engages with the science no less
than with the laboratory workers, modelers, theorists, technicians, and technologies.
Indeed, the approach I find most intriguing, fruitful, grounded, rigorous, and delightful is
when feminist science studies is of the science, materially immersed in and inseparable
from it. Like good bench scientists, indeed the kinds of scientists-for-justice feminists
hope to train, mentor, and foster, feminist science studies practitioners work the
equipment, theoretical and experimental, without any illusion of clean hands and
unapologetically express their enthusiasm and amazement for the world and the
possibilities of cultivating just relationships among the world’s diverse ways of
being/becoming.4
Theorizing, a form of experimenting, is about being in touch. What keeps theories alive
and lively is being responsible and responsive to the world’s patternings and murmurings.
On Touching—The Inhuman That Therefore I Am (v1.1)
karen barad

Doing theory requires being open to the world’s aliveness, allowing oneself to be lured
by curiosity, surprise, and wonder. Theories are not mere metaphysical pronouncements
on the world from some presumed position of exteriority. Theories are living and
breathing reconfigurings of the world. The world theorizes as well as experiments with
itself. Figuring, reconfiguring. Animate and (so-called) inanimate creatures do not merely
embody mathematical theories; they do mathematics. But life, whether organic or
inorganic, animate or inanimate, is not an unfolding algorithm. Electrons, molecules,
brittlestars, jellyfish, coral reefs, dogs, rocks, icebergs, plants, asteroids, snowflakes, and
bees stray from all calculable paths, making leaps here and there, or rather, making here
and there from leaps, shifting familiarly patterned practices, testing the waters of what
might yet be/have been/could still have been, doing thought experiments with their very
being. Thought experiments are material matters.
Thinking has never been a disembodied or uniquely human activity. Stepping into the
void, opening to possibilities, straying, going out of bounds, off the beaten path—
diverging and touching down again, swerving and returning, not as consecutive moves
but as experiments in in/determinacy. Spinning off in any old direction is neither
theorizing nor viable; it loses the thread, the touch of entangled beings (be)coming
together-apart. All life forms (including inanimate forms of liveliness) do theory. The
idea is to do collaborative research, to be in touch, in ways that enable response-ability.7
In an important sense, touch is the primary concern of physics. Its entire history can be
understood as a struggle to articulate what touch entails. How do particles sense one
another? Through direct contact, an ether, action-at-a-distance forces, fields, the
exchange of virtual particles? What does the exchange of energy entail? How is a change
in motion effected? What is pressure? What is temperature? How does the eye see? How
do lenses work? What are the different kinds of forces that particles experience? How
many kinds are there? What is the nature of measurement?8 Once you start looking at it
this way, you get a dizzying feeling as things shift. This particular take on physics, and its
history, entails a torquing, a perturbation from the usual storylines, but I submit that it is
fair description and worth considering for the ways it opens up new possibilities for
thinking about both the nature of physics and of touch.
Using feminist science studies as a touchstone, I attempt to stay in touch with the
material-affective dimensions of doing and engaging science. Straying from all
determinate paths while staying in touch, in the remainder of this essay I explore the
physics of touch in its physicality, its virtuality, its affectivity, its e-motion-ality, whereby
all pretense of being able to separate out the affective from the scientific dimensions of
touching falls away.

Theorizing Touching / Touching Theorizing
Touch, for a physicist, is but an electromagnetic interaction.
A common explanation for the physics of touching is that one thing it does not involve
is . . . well, touching. That is, there is no actual contact involved. You may think you are
touching a coffee mug when you are about to raise it to your mouth, but your hand is not
actually touching the mug. Sure, you can feel the smooth surface of the mug’s exterior
right where your fingers come into contact with it (or seem to), but what you are actually
sensing, physicists tell us, is the electromagnetic repulsion between the electrons of the
atoms that make up your fingers and those that make up the mug. (Electrons are tiny
negatively charged particles that surround the nuclei of atoms, and having the same
charges they repel one another, much like powerful little magnets. As you decrease the
distance between them the repulsive force increases.) Try as you might, you cannot bring
two electrons into direct contact with each other.
The reason the desk feels solid, or the cat’s coat feels soft, or we can (even) hold coffee
cups and one another’s hands, is an effect of electromagnetic repulsion. All we really
ever feel is the electromagnetic force, not the other whose touch we seek. Atoms are
mostly empty space, and electrons, which lie at the farthest reaches of an atom, hinting at
its perimeter, cannot bear direct contact. Electromagnetic repulsion: negatively charged
particles communicating at a distance push each other away. That is the tale physics
usually tells about touching. Repulsion at the core of attraction. See how far that story
gets you with lovers. No wonder the romantic poets had had enough.
The quantum theory of touching is radically different from the classical explanation.
Actually, it is radically queer, as we will see.
Quantum Field Theory: A Virtual Introduction
Quantum field theory allows for something radically new in the history of Western
physics: the transience of matter’s existence. No longer suspended in eternity, matter is
born, lives, and dies. But even more than that, there is a radical deconstruction of identity
and of the equation of matter with essence in ways that transcend even the profound
un/doings of (nonrelativistic) quantum mechanics. Quantum field theory, I will argue
below, is a call, an alluring murmur from the insensible within the sensible to radically
rework the nature of being and time. The insights of quantum field theory are crucial, but
the philosophical terrain is rugged, slippery, and mostly unexplored.9 The question is:
How to proceed with exquisite care? We will need to be in and of the science, no way
around it. Unfortunately, in the limited space I have here I can only lightly touch, really
just barely graze, the surface.10
Quantum field theory differs from classical physics not only in its formalism but in its
ontology. Classical physics inherits a Democretean ontology—only particles and the
void—with one additional element: fields.

Particles, fields, and the void are three separate elements in classical physics, whereas
they are intra-related elements in quantum field theory. To take one instance, according
to quantum field theory, particles are quanta of the fields. For example, the quantum of
the electromagnetic field is a photon, the quantum of a gravitational field is a graviton,
electrons are quanta of an electron field, and so on. Another feature is that something
very profound happens to the relationship between particles and the void. I will continue
to explain how this relationship is radically rethought in what follows. For now, I simply
note, pace Democritus, that particles no longer take their place in the void; rather, they
are constitutively entangled with it. As for the void, it is no longer vacuous. It is a living,
breathing indeterminacy of non/being. The vacuum is a jubilant exploration of virtuality,
where virtual particles—whose identifying characteristic is not rapidity (despite the
common tale explaining that they are particles that go in and out of the vacuum faster
than their existence can be detected) but, rather, indeterminacy—are having a field day
performing experiments in being and time. That is, virtuality is a kind of thought
experiment the world performs. Virtual particles do not traffic in a metaphysics of
presence. They do not exist in space and time. They are ghostly non/existences that teeter
on the edge of the infinitely fine blade between being and nonbeing. Admittedly,
virtuality is difficult to grasp. Indeed, this is its very nature. To put it concisely, virtual
particles are quantized indeterminacies-in-action.11
Troubling Matters: Infinities, Perversities, Hauntings
Physicists [. . .] took the vacuum as something substantial [. . .] the scene of wild
activities. —Cao and Schweber
When it comes to quantum field theory, it is not difficult to find trouble. It is not so much
that trouble is around every corner; according to quantum field theory it inhabits us and
we inhabit it, or rather, trouble inhabits everything and nothing—matter and the void.
How does quantum field theory understand the nature of the electron, or any other
particle for that matter? It turns out that even the simplest particle, a point particle
(devoid of structure) like the electron, causes all kinds of difficulties for quantum field
theory. To be fair, one of the problems is already evident in classical field theory.
Immediately after its discovery in the nineteenth century, physicists imagined the electron
to be a tiny sphere. However, if you think of an electron as a tiny spherical entity, a little
ball, with bits of negative charge distributed on its surface, and remember that like
charges repel one another, then you can see the intractable difficulty that arises with this
model: all the bits of negative charge distributed on the surface of the sphere repel one
another, and since there is no positive (unlike) charge around to mitigate the mutual
repulsion each bit feels, the electron’s own electromagnetic self-energy would be too
much to bear—it would blow itself apart. Such stability issues pointed to the need for a
better understanding of the electron’s structure.
In 1925, the Russian physicist Yakov Il’ich Frenkel offered a different proposal: the
electron is a negatively charged point particle. That is, the electron has no substructure. In
On Touching—The Inhuman That Therefore I Am (v1.1)
karen barad

this way, he eliminated the difficulty of the mutual repulsion of bits of charges distributed
on the surface because there were no bits of charge here and there, just a single point
carrying a negative charge. But the attempt to push one instability away just produced
another, for if the electron is a point particle (and therefore has zero radius), then the selfenergy
contribution—that is, the interaction of the particle with the surrounding
electromagnetic field that it creates—is infinite. Frenkel believed that this paradox could
only be resolved using quantum theory.
Not only did the infinities persist when quantum field theory tried to resolve the problem,
they multiplied. Indeed, infinities are now accepted as an integral part of the theory:
marks of self-interaction—the
trace of the inseparability of particle and void. Specifically, the electron’s self-energy
takes the form of an electron exchanging a virtual photon (the quantum of the
electromagnetic field) with itself. Richard Feynman, one of the key authors of quantum
field theory, frames the difficulty in explicitly moral terms: “Instead of going directly
from one point to another, the electron goes along for a while and suddenly emits a
photon; then (horrors!) it absorbs its own photon. Perhaps there’s something ‘immoral’
about that, but the electron does it!” (Feynman 115–16). Hence, the infinity associated
with electron’s self-energy, and other related infinities, wind up installed in quantum field
theory as intrinsic “perversions.”
Apparently, touching oneself, or being touched by oneself—the
ambiguity/undecidability/indeterminacy may itself be the key to the trouble—is not
simply troubling but a moral violation, the very source of all the trouble. The electron is
not merely causing trouble for us; in an important sense it is troubling itself, or rather, its
self, as we will soon see. That is, the very notion of “itself,” of identity, is radically
queered. (Gender trouble for sure, but that isn’t the half of it.) Then there is the question
of whether what is really at issue is not touching oneself per se but rather the possibility
of touch touching itself. The issue arises in quantum field theory in the following way:
the electron emits a photon that “makes a positron-electron pair, and—again, if you’ll
hold your ‘moral’ objections—the electron and positron annihilate, creating a new photon
that is ultimately absorbed by the electron” (Feynman 116–17).13
In fact, there is an infinite number of such possibilities, or what Feynman referred to in
his path integral approach to quantum field theory as an infinite sum over all possible
histories: the electron not only exchanges a virtual photon with itself, it is possible for
that virtual photon to enjoy other intra-actions with itself—for example, it can vanish,
turning itself into a virtual electron and positron which subsequently annihilate each other
before turning back into a virtual photon—before it is absorbed by the electron. And so
on. This “and so on” is shorthand for an infinite set of possibilities involving every
possible kind of interaction with every possible kind of virtual particle it can interact
with.14 That is, there is a virtual exploration of every possibility. And this infinite set of
possibilities, or infinite sum of histories, entails a particle touching itself, and then that
touching touching itself, and so on, ad infinitum. Every level of touch, then, is itself
touched by all possible others. Hence, self-touching is an encounter with the infinite
alterity of the self. Matter is an enfolding, an involution, it cannot help touching itself,
On Touching—The Inhuman That Therefore I Am (v1.1)
karen barad

and in this self-touching it comes in contact with the infinite alterity that it is.
Polymorphous perversity raised to an infinite power: talk about a queer intimacy! What is
being called into question here is the very nature of the “self,” and in terms of not just
being but also time. That is, in an important sense, the self is dispersed/diffracted through
time and being.
The “problem” of self-touching, especially self-touching the other, is a perversity of
quantum field theory that goes far deeper than we can touch on here. The gist of it is this:
this perversity that is at the root of an unwanted infinity, that threatens the very
possibility of calculability, gets “renormalized” (obviously – should we expect anything
less?!). How does this happen? Physicists conjectured that there are two different kinds of
infinities/perversions involved: one that has to do with self-touching, and another that has
to do with nakedness. In particular, there is an infinity associated with the “bare” point
particle, that is, with the perverse assumption we started with that there is only an
electron – the “undressed,” “bare” electron – and the void, each separate from the other.15
Renormalization is the systematic cancellation of infinities: an intervention based on the
idea that the infinities can be understood to cancel one another out. Perversion
eliminating perversion. The cancellation idea is this: The infinity of the “bare” point
particle cancels the infinity associated with the “cloud” of virtual particles; in this way,
the “bare” point particle is “dressed by the vacuum contribution (that is, the cloud of
virtual particles). The “dressed” electron, the physical electron, is thereby renormalized,
that is made “normal” (finite). (I am using technical language here!) Renormalization is
the mathematical handling/taming of these infinities. That is, the infinities are “subtracted”
from one another, yielding a finite answer.16 Mathematically speaking, this is a tour de
force. Conceptually, it is a queer theorist’s delight. It shows that all of matter, matter in
its “essence” (of course, that is precisely what is being troubled here), is a massive
overlaying of perversities: an infinity of infinities.
No doubt, the fact that this subtraction of two infinities can be handled in a systematic
way that yields a finite value is no small achievement, and a very sophisticated
mathematical machinery needed to be developed to make this possible. Nonetheless,
whatever the attitude concerning the legitimacy or illegitimacy of renormalization (and
physicists have differed in their sense of that), the mathematical operation of subtraction
does not effect a conceptual cancellation. The infinities are not avoided; they must be
reckoned with. Philosophically, as well as mathematically, they need to be taken into
account. Renormalization is a trace of physics’ ongoing (self-)deconstruction: it
continually finds ways to open itself up to new possibilities, to iterative re(con)figurings.
Perhaps then the resurfacing of infinities is a sign that the theory is vibrant and alive, not
“sick.”
To summarize, quantum field theory radically deconstructs the classical ontology. Here
are a few key points: the starting point ontology of particles and the void—a foundational
reductionist essentialism—is undone by quantum field theory; the void is not empty, it is
an ongoing play of in/determinacies; physical particles are inseparable from the void, in
particular they intra-act with the virtual particles of the void, and are thereby inseparable
from it; the infinite plethora of alterities given by the play of quantum in/determinacies
On Touching—The Inhuman That Therefore I Am (v1.1)
karen barad

are constitutive inclusions in a radical un/doing of identity; the perversities/infinites of
the theory are intrinsic to the theory and must be reckoned with; desire cannot be
eliminated from the core of being – it is threaded through it; and the unknown, the
insensible, new realms of in/determinacy, which have incalculable effects on mattering,
need to be acknowledged, or, even better, taken into account.17
All touching entails an infinite alterity, so that touching the other is touching all others,
including the “self,” and touching the “self” entails touching the strangers within. Even
the smallest bits of matter are an unfathomable multitude. Each “individual” always
already includes all possible intra-actions with “itself” through all the virtual others,
including those that are noncontemporaneous with “itself.” That is, every finite being is
always already threaded through with an infinite alterity diffracted through being and
time.18 Indeterminacy is an un/doing of identity that unsettles the very foundations of
non/being. Together with Derrida, we might then say that “identity [. . .] can only affirm
itself as identity to itself by opening itself to the hospitality of a difference from itself or
of a difference with itself. Condition of the self, such a difference from and with itself
would then be its very thing [. . .]: the stranger at home” (Aporias 10). “Individuals” are
infinitely indebted to all others, where indebtedness is about not a debt that follows or
results from a transaction but, rather, a debt that is the condition of possibility of
giving/receiving. In a chapter of On Touching—Jean-Luc Nancy titled “To Self-Touch
You,” Derrida touches on, and troubles, the account Jean-Luc Nancy gives of sense as
touching. He remarks that self-touching “in no way reduce[s] the alterity of the other who
comes to inhabit the self-touching, or at least to haunt it, at least as much as it spectralizes
any experience of ‘touching the other’ ” (274).
Ontological indeterminacy, a radical openness, an infinity of possibilities, is at the core of
mattering. How strange that indeterminacy, in its infinite openness, is the condition for
the possibility of all structures in their dynamically reconfiguring in/stabilities. Matter in
its iterative materialization is a dynamic play of in/determinacy. Matter is never a settled
matter. It is always already radically open. Closure cannot be secured when the
conditions of im/possibilities and lived indeterminacies are integral, not supplementary,
to what matter is.
Together with Haraway, we might ask: Whom and what do we touch when we touch
electrons?19 Or, rather, in decentering and deconstructing the “us” in the very act of
touching (touching as intra-action), we might put the question this way: When electrons
meet each other “halfway,” when they intra-act with one another, when they touch one
another, whom or what do they touch? In addition to all the various iteratively
reconfiguring ways that electrons, indeed all material “entities,” are entangled relations of
becoming, there is also the fact that materiality “itself” is always already touched by and
touching infinite configurings of other beings and other times. In an important sense, in a
breathtakingly intimate sense, touching, sensing, is what matter does, or rather, what
matter is: matter is condensations of response-ability. Touching is a matter of response.
Each of “us” is constituted in response-ability. Each of “us” is constituted as responsible
for the other, as being in touch with the other.
On Touching—The Inhuman That Therefore I Am (v1.1)
karen barad

Justice-to-Come and the Inhumanness of Its Call
Clearly, if we take quantum mechanics seriously as making a statement about the real
world, then the demands it places on our conventional thinking are enormous. Hidden
behind the discrete and independent objects of the sense world is an entangled realm, in
which the simple notions of identity and locality no longer apply. We may not notice the
intimate relationships common to that level of existence, but, regardless of our blindness
to them, they persist. Events that appear to us as random may, in fact, be correlated with
other events occurring elsewhere. Behind the indifference of the macroscopic world,
“passion at a distance” knits everything together.
—Greenstein and Zajonc
Touch is never pure or innocent. It is inseparable from the field of differential relations
that constitute it.
The infinite touch of nothingness is threaded through all being/ becoming, a tangible
indeterminacy that goes to the heart of matter. Matter is not only iteratively reconstituted
through its various intra-actions, it is also infinitely and infinitesimally shot through with
alterity. If the serious challenge, the really hard work, seemed to be taking account of
constitutive exclusions, perhaps this awakening to the infinity of constitutive
inclusions—the in/determinacy, the virtuality that is a constitutive part of all finitude—
calls us to a new sensibility.20 How unfathomable is the task of taking account not only of
mattering but of its inseparability from the void, including the infinite abundance that
inhabits and surrounds all being?
For all our concerns with nonhumans as well as humans, there is, nonetheless, always
something that drops out. But what if the point is not to widen the bounds of inclusion to
let everyone and everything in?
What if it takes sensing the abyss, the edges of the limits of “inclusion” and “exclusion”
before the binary of inside/outside, inclusion/exclusion, mattering/not-mattering can be
seriously troubled? What if it is only in facing the inhuman—the indeterminate non/being
non/becoming of mattering and not mattering—that an ethics committed to the rupture of
indifference can arise?21 What if it is only in the encounter with the inhuman—the
liminality of no/thingness—in all its aliveness/liveliness, its conditions of im/possibility,
that we can truly confront our inhumanity, that is, our actions lacking compassion?
Perhaps it takes facing the inhuman within us before com-passion—suffering together
with, participating with, feeling with, being moved by—can be lived. How would we feel
if it is by way of the inhuman that we come to feel, to care, to respond?
Troubling oneself, or rather, the “self,” is at the root of caring (oed). Levinas makes
trouble for the conventional notions of ethics by starting with, and staying with, this
trouble.22 Derrida, citing Levinas, explains, “[R]esponsibility is not initially of myself or
for myself” but is “derived from the other” (Derrida qtd. in Kirkby 463). One can also
hear reverberations of Levinas when the philosopher Alphonso Lingis writes:
“Responsibility is coextensive with our sensibility; in our sensibility we are exposed to
the outside, to the world’s being, in such a way that we are bound to answer for it” (226).
On Touching—The Inhuman That Therefore I Am (v1.1)
karen barad

The sense of exposure to the other is crucial and so is the binding obligation that is our
vulnerability, our openness, as Lingis reminds us. But what would it mean to
acknowledge that responsibility extends to the insensible as well as the sensible, and that
we are always already opened up to the other from the “inside” as well as the “outside”?23
How might we come in contact with or least touch upon an ethics that is alive to the
virtual? This would seem to require, at the very least, being in touch with the infinite
in/determinacy at the heart of matter, the abundance of nothingness, the infinitude of the
void and its in/determinate murmurings, the muted cries, and silence that speaks of the
possibilities of justice-to-come.24
Crucially, entanglements of spacetimemattering are threaded through and inseparable
from the infinite alterity of the virtual.
Entanglements are relations of obligation—being bound to the other—enfolded
traces of othering. Othering, the constitution of an “Other,” entails an
indebtedness to the “Other,” who is irreducibly and materially bound to,
threaded through, the “self”—a diffraction/dispersion of identity. “Otherness” is
an entangled relation of difference (différance). Ethicality entails noncoincidence
with oneself.
Crucially, there is no getting away from ethics on this account of
mattering. Ethics is an integral part of the diffraction (ongoing differentiating)
patterns of worlding, not a superimposing of human values onto the ontology of
the world (as if “fact” and “value” were radically other). The very nature of
matter entails an exposure to the Other. Responsibility is not an obligation that
the subject chooses but rather an incarnate relation that precedes the
intentionality of consciousness. Responsibility is not a calculation to be
performed. It is a relation always already integral to the world’s ongoing intraactive
becoming and not-becoming. It is an iterative (re)opening up to, an
enabling of responsiveness. Not through the realization of some existing
possibility, but through the iterative reworking of im/possibility, an on-going
rupture. (Barad, “Quantum Entanglements” 265)
Ethicality entails hospitality to the stranger threaded through oneself and through all
being and non/being.
I want to conclude this essay by making an attempt at putting “us” more intimately in
touch with this infinite alterity that lives in, around, and through us, by waking us up to
the inhuman that therefore
we are, to a recognition that it may well be the inhuman, the insensible, the irrational, the
unfathomable, and the incalculable that will help us face the depths of what responsibility
entails. A cacophony of whispered screams, gasps, and cries, an infinite multitude of
indeterminate beings diffracted through different spacetimes, the nothingness, is always
already within us, or rather, it lives through us. We cannot shut it out, we cannot control
it. We cannot block out the irrationality, the perversity, the madness we fear, in the hopes
of a more orderly world. But this does not mitigate our responsibility. On the contrary, it
is what makes it possible. Indeterminacy is not a lack, a loss, but an affirmation, a
On Touching—The Inhuman That Therefore I Am (v1.1)
karen barad

celebration of the plentitude of nothingness.
I want to come back to Lingis’s diffractive reading of Levinas, as itself diffractively read
through the literary scholar Avivah Gottlieb Zornberg, in her book The Murmuring Deep.
[T]he murmur is the message: the background hum of life—desolate, excessive,
neither language nor silence—is what links us to one another. What can be
shared, for example, with the dying? Perhaps Lingis suggests, rather than
transmitting clear meanings, the encounter rests on an acknowledgement of an
elemental otherness that is related to our own: “We do not relate to the light, the
earth, the air, and the warmth only with our individual sensibility and sensuality.
We communicate to one another the light our eyes know, the ground that sustains
our postures, and the air and the warmth with which we speak. We face one
another as condensations of earth, light, air, and warmth, and orient one another
in the elemental in a primary communication” [. . .].
In an inspired reading of his materials, Frosh cites Žižek and Lingis, as
well as Levinas and Agamben, to suggest that the ultimate communion between
people rests in the capacity to draw on an elemental life that is experienced as
inhuman. In this way, he argues, access to the murmuring deep, the inhuman
aspect of human aliveness, sustains contact with the other. “Being ‘in’ a
relationship with another is also a matter of being outside it, sharing in the
impersonality that comes from being lived through by forces that constitute the
human subject.”(xxi–xxii)25
How truly sublime the notion that it is the inhuman—that which commonly gets
associated with humanity’s inhumanity as a lack of compassion—that may be the very
condition of possibility of feeling the suffering of the other, of literally being in touch
with the other, of feeling the exchange of e-motion in the binding obligations of
entanglements. That is, perhaps what we must face in thinking responsibility and justice
is the existence of the inhuman as threaded through and lived through us, as enabling us,
and every being/becoming, to reach out to the insensible otherness that we might
otherwise never touch. The indeterminacy at the heart of being calls out to us to respond.
Living compassionately, sharing in the suffering of the other, does not require anything
like complete understanding (and might, in fact, necessitate the disruption of this very
yearning). Rather, living compassionately requires recognizing and facing our
responsibility to the infinitude of the other, welcoming the stranger whose very existence
is the possibility of touching and being touched, who gifts us with both the ability to
respond and the longing for justice-to-come.
On Touching—The Inhuman That Therefore I Am (v1.1)
karen barad

I would like to thank Susanne Witzgall for providing a home for this essay. Thanks also to
Sophia Roosth, Astrid Schrader, and Elizabeth Weed for inviting a creative and
provocative response to the essays that appeared in the special issue of differences. I am
grateful to Lina Dib, Eva Hayward, Carla Hustak, Natasha Myers, Sophia Roosth, and
Astrid Schrader for the lively provocations of their essays, which inspired this response. I
am indebted to Fern Feldman for her patient reading and feedback on the essay, for her
remarkable insights, and for the gift of her enthusiasm in discussing quantum field theory
and other wild ideas over the years.
Karen Barad is Professor of Feminist Studies, Philosophy, and History of Consciousness
at the University of California, Santa Cruz. Barad holds a doctorate degree in theoretical
particle physics, or more specifically, quantum field theory. Barad held a tenured
appointment in a physics department before moving into more interdisciplinary spaces.
Barad is the author of Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the
Entanglement of Matter and Meaning (Duke University Press, 2007) and numerous
articles in the fields of physics, philosophy, science studies, poststructuralist theory, and
feminist theory. Barad is currently working on a book project titled “Infinity,
Nothingness, and Justice-to-Come.” Barad is the Co-Director of the UCSC Science &
Justice Training Program.

This paper is a revision of the original paper “On Touching – The Inhuman that
Therefore I Am”, which was published in differences (2012), 23(3): 206-223. That paper
was unfortunately printed with errors that should have been corrected. I am thankful that
Susanne Witzgall has provided an opportunity for this article to be printed in its correct
form. It does include minor revisions to reset the introduction of the paper since it is now
being published in a different forum and no longer introduces a journal special issue,
which was the original context.
1. The title of my essay here expresses my virtual engagements and entanglements with
Derrida. I am indebted to Astrid Schrader and Vicki Kirby for putting me in touch with
Derrida through their marvelous materialist readings of his work.
2. Touch has been an object of study for centuries, going back at least to Aristotle’s
momentous work on this topic. Part of what is at stake in this essay, and others in this
issue, is joining with other feminist and postcolonial theorists in troubling the notion of
touch as an innocent form of engagement and also, by implication, troubling its
positioning in the history of philosophy as a mutually consenting act between individuals,
free of culture, history, and politics. The literature on this is extensive. See, for example,
Ahmed and Stacey; Anzaldúa; Ball; Manning; Marks; and Puig de la Bellacasa.
3. I have in mind here the set of articles published in the special issue of differences 23:3
(2012) in which this present essay was first published. With respect to my essay in that
volume, unfortunately, two important edits made at the proof stage were not properly
incorporated into the printed version. Upon pointing out this error, I requested that a
On Touching—The Inhuman That Therefore I Am (v1.1)
karen barad

correction be made, but despite the admission of error the editors refused to issue a
correction. I consider this to be the official version of the paper.
4. The Science & Justice Training Program for graduate students at UCSC has been
designed to foster collaborative endeavors that train students to “do ethics at the lab
bench”. For more details, see PLOS Biology article.
5. Which is not to say that some theorists do not operate as if theorizing is a lofty
enterprise that lifts the theorist above it all. My point here is that theorizing is as much a
material practice as other kinds of practices, like experimenting, to which it is often
counterposed.
6. The allusion to the making of spacetime through leaps, that is, through quantum
dis/continuities, is discussed in more detail in Barad, “Quantum Entanglements.” In that
essay I explain my use of the slash to denote a dis/continuity—a cutting together-apart—
of the terms in play (in the indeterminacy marked by their superposition).
7. See Schrader on response-ability as a kind of practice, including laboratory practices,
that enables the organism or object of study to respond. By attending to the fine details of
the science, by being of the science, doing the science justice, Schrader shows how
incompatible laboratory findings (which have been the source of controversy in the
scientific community) can in fact be reconciled by paying attention to the kinds and
degrees of response-ability used in different laboratory practices.
8. Measurements is a form of touching. Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, once seen as
the foundational principle of quantum physics, is at root an expression of the limits of
human knowledge that result when a particle interacts with another in the processes of
measurement. The uncertainty principle has now been replaced by the more fundamental
notion of quantum entanglement, which is a contemporary expression of Bohr’s
“indeterminacy principle.” According to the latter, measurements entail touch in the form
of intra-actions, not interactions. See Barad, Meeting.
9. When there is talk of quantum physics, and especially when there is a consideration of
its philosophical implications, the theory at issue, though it is usually not specified, is
nonrelativistic quantum mechanics. Quantum field theory goes further, combining the
insights of quantum mechanics, special relativity, and classical field theories. The
philosophical implications of quantum field theory are much less explored. See, for
example, Brown and Harré; Cao and Schweber; and Teller.
10. It has been my practice and my commitment to provide a sufficiently rich sense of the
science that the reader can see how the storyline holds together even if there is not
sufficient time or space to fully develop it. But here I can only offer a few hints of some
key ideas. For more details, see Barad, “In/humanity.” My in-progress book manuscript,
provisionally titled Infinity, Nothingness, and Justice-to-Come, provides an in-depth
explication.
11. For an accessible introductory treatment of quantum field theory, especially with
regard to its understanding of the vacuum and virtuality, see Barad, What Is the Measure
of Nothingness?
12. The moral fabric of the theory and the particles whose behaviors it purports to explain
are widely questioned in quantum field theory. To offer a couple of additional examples,
Kaiser takes note of common references to the “sickness” of quantum field theory and to
the virtual particle as a “naughty schoolchild” (28–30).
13. According to quantum field theory, most kinds of particles have corresponding
antiparticles, that is, particles with the same mass and opposite charge. For example,
positrons are antimatter electrons. When positrons and electrons meet, they annihilate
each other, producing photons. The reverse process can also occur: photons can turn into
positron-electron pairs (or other kinds of particle-antiparticle pairs). Real particle
interactions must conserve energy, but this is not the case for virtual particle interactions.
14. For example, in addition to virtual electron-positron pairs, it can interact with virtual
muon-antimuon pairs, virtual quark-antiquark pairs, etc. The list of others is long.
Additionally, there is an infinite number of ways to intra-act.
15. There are in actuality more than two kinds of infinitites, but that is a subject for
another time. “Bare,” “undressed,” and “dressed” are part of the official technical
language; I am not making up my own metaphorical terms to help make this more
accessible. In technical language, the infinity I am talking about here refers to the bare
parameters in the “Lagrangian” or field equations.
16. Actually, to put it this way is a bit of a fudge. The renormalized or redefined
parameters (which replace the bare ones) are not calculable by the theory but, rather, are
written in using the experimental values. This gives it the feel of a shell game no matter
how mathematically sophisticated it is. Once the renormalized charge and mass are put
into the theory, however, other kinds of quantities can theoretically be derived and
compared with experimentation.
17. This last point refers to the “cut-off” that is part of the renormalization procedure. See
esp. Barad, Infinity, Nothingness, and Justice-to-Come; and Cao and Schweber.
18. Unfortunately, I do not have sufficient space to go into any detail concerning the
mutually reciprocal, mutually constitutive indeterminacy of being and time. A few
summary points might be helpful to the reader. There is no meaningful binary between
being and becoming since time is not given. All being-becoming is always already a
superposition of all possible histories involving all virtual others, where “histories” do
not happen in time but, rather, are the indeterminate ma(r)kings of time. That is, the
infinite alterity of being not merely includes others contemporaneous and
noncontemporaneous with “its” time but also is always already open to remakings of
temporality. Hence, all matter is always already a dynamic field of matterings. The play
of quantum in/determinacies deconstructs not only the metaphysics of presence and the
On Touching—The Inhuman That Therefore I Am (v1.1)
karen barad

metaphysics of individualism but also anything like the possibility of separating them.
The indeterminacies of being and time are together undone.
19. Haraway writes: “Whom and what do I touch when I touch my dog?” (35). See in
particular her discussion of Jim’s dog (5–8).
20. “Mattering is about the (contingent and temporary) becoming determinate (and
becoming indeterminate) of matter and meaning, without fixity, without closure. The
conditions of possibility of mattering are also conditions of impossibility: intra-actions
necessarily entail constitutive exclusions, which constitute an irreducible openness”
(Barad, “Quantum Entanglements”). Being accountable for phenomena necessarily
entails taking account of constitutive exclusions as part of accounting for the
phenomenon. See Barad Meeting and “Quantum Entanglements.”
21. The inhuman is not the same as the nonhuman. While the “nonhuman” is
differentially (co-)constituted (together with the “human”) through particular cuts, I think
of the inhuman as an infinite intimacy that touches the very nature of touch, that which
holds open the space of the liveliness of indeterminacies that bleed through the cuts and
inhabit the between of particular entanglements.
22. Notably, some of the trouble that Levinas introduces goes against his commitment to
troubling the notion of the self at the heart of ethics. See, for example, Butler’s
(“Precarious”) discussion of Levinas’ ironic introduction of racialized essentialisms into
his philosophy.
23. See Yusoff (“Insensible Worlds”) on the need for an ethics of the insensible.
24. Of late, I find myself experimenting with different narrative registers. Increasingly, I
find myself drawn to poetics as a mode of expression, not in order to move away from
thinking rigorously but, on the contrary, to lure ‘us’ toward the possibilities of engaging
the force of imagination in its materiality. Francis Bacon, the man who is credited with
giving us the scientific method, concerned himself with these very issues of touch as the
ultimate proposition and the effectivity of the force of imagination. In fact, he put the
question of touch on science’s docket, and the etymology of contact can be traced to his
1626 pronouncement: “The Desire of return into the Body; whereupon followeth that
appetite of Contact and Conjunction” (qtd. in oed). The force of imagination puts us in
touch with the possibilities for sensing the insensible, the indeterminate, “that which
travels along the edge of being; it is is not being, but the opening of being toward-theworld”
(Yusoff, “Insensible Worlds,” 220). Or rather, it brings us into an appreciation of,
helps us touch, the imaginings of materiality itself in its ongoing thought experiments
with being/becoming.
25. This moving passage, which is very suggestive in light of the discussion here, speaks
to the inherent inhumanness of the human, albeit with the human still very much at the
center of the discussion. Note that the inhuman is being used in different ways by
different authors.