Those were the days, when we were all at sea. It seems like yesterday to me. Species, sex, race, class: in those days none of this meant anything at all. No parents, no children, just ourselves, strings of inseparable sisters, warm and wet, indistinguishable one from the other, gloriously indiscriminate, promiscuous and fused. No generations. No future, no past. An endless geographic plane of micromeshing pulsing quanta, limitless webs of interacting blendings, leakings, mergings, weaving through ourselves, running rings around each other, heedless, needless, aimless, careless, thoughdess, amok. Folds and foldings, plying and multiplying, plicatihg and replicating. We had no definition, no meaning, no way of telling each other apart. We were whatever we were up to at the time. Free exchanges, microprocesses finely tuned, polymorphous transfers without regard for borders and boundaries. There was nothing to hang on to, nothing to be grasped, nothing to protect or be protected from. Insides and outsides did not count. We gave no thought to any such things. We gave no thought to anything at all. Every-

thing was there for the taking then. We paid no attention: it was all for free. It had been this way for tens, thousands, millions, billions of what were later defined as years. If we had thought about it, we would have said it would go on forever, this fluent, fluid world.
And then something occurred to us. The climate changed. We couldn’t breathe. It grew terribly cold. Far too cold for us. Everything we touched was poisonous. Noxious gases and thin toxic airs flooded our oceanic zone. Some said we had brought it on ourselves, that all our activity had backfired, that we had destroyed our environment by an accident we had provoked. There were rumors of betrayal and sabotage, whisperings of alien invasion and mutant beings from another ship.
Only a few of us survived the break. Conditions were so terrible that many of those who did pull through wished they had died. We mutated to such an extent that we were unrecognizable to ourselves, banding together in units of a kind which, like everything, had been unthinkable before. We found ourselves working as slave components of systems whose scales and complexities we could not comprehend. Were we their parasites? Were they ours? Either way we became components of our own imprisonment. To all intents and purposes, we disappeared.
“Subtly, subtly, they become Invisible; wondrously, won- drously, they become soundless—they are thus able to be their enemies’ Fates."

Sun Tzu, The Art of War

ada
In 1833, a teenage girl met a machine which she came to regard “as a friend.” It was a futuristic device which seemed to have dropped into her world at least a century before its time.
Later to be known as Ada Lovelace, she was then Ada Byron, the only child of Annabella, a mathematician who had herself been dubbed Princess of Parallelograms by her husband. Lord Byron. The machine was the Difference Engine, a calculating system on which the engineer Charles Babbage had been working for many years. “We both went to see the thinking machine (for such it seems) last Monday,” Annabella wrote in her diary. To the amazement of its onlookers, it “raised several Nos. to the 2nd & 3rd powers, and extracted the root of a quadratic Equation.” While most of the audience gazed in astonishment at the machine, Ada “young as she was, understood its working, and saw the great beauty of the invention.”
When Babbage had begun work on the Difference Engine, he was interested in the possibility of “making machinery to compute arithmetical tables.” Although he struggled to persuade the British government to fund his work, he had no doubt about the feasibility and the value of such a machine. Isolating common mathematical differences between tabulated numbers, Babbage was convinced that this “method of differences supplied a general principle by which all tables might be computed through limited intervals, by one uniform process.” By 1822 he had made a small but functional machine, and “in the year 1833, an event of great importance in the history of the engine occurred. Mr. Babbage had directed a portion of it.

consisting of sixteen figures, to be put together. It was capable of calculating tables having two or three orders of differences; and, to some extent, of forming other tables. The action of this portion completely justified the expectations raised, and gave a most satisfactory assurance of its final success.”
Shortly after this part of his machine went on public display, Babbage was struck by the thought that the Difference Engine, still incomplete, had already superseded itself. “Having, in the meanwhile, naturally speculated upon the general principles on which machinery for calculation might be constructed, a principle of an entirely new kind occurred to him, the power of which over the most complicated arithmetical operations seemed nearly unbounded. On reexamining his drawings . . . the new principle appeared to be limited only by die extent of the mechanism it might require.” If the simplicity of the mechanisms which allowed the. Difference Engine to perform addition could be extended to thousands rather than hundreds of components, a machine could be built which would “execute more rapidly the calculations for which the Difference Engine was intended; or, that the Difference Engine would itself be superseded by a far simpler mode of construction.” The government officials who had funded Babbage’s work on the first machine were not pleased to learn that it was now to be abandoned in favor of a new set of mechanical processes which “were essentially different from those of the Difference Engine.” While Babbage did his best to persuade them that the. “fact of a new superseding an old machine, in a very few years, is one of constant occurrence in our manufactories; and instances might be pointed out in which the advance of invention has been so rapid, and the demand for machinery so great, that half-finished machines have been thrown aside as useless before their completion,” Babbage’s decision to proceed with his new

machine was also his break with the bodies which had funded his previous work. Babbage lost the support of the state, but he had already gained assistance of a very different kind.
“You are a brave man,” Ada told Babbage, “to give yourself wholly up to Fairy-Guidance!—I advise you to allow yourself to be unresistingly bewitched . . .” No one, she added, “knows what almost awful energy & power He yet undevelopped in that wiry Htde system of mine.”
In 1842 Louis Menabrea, an Italian military engineer, had deposited his Sketch of the Analytical Engine Invented by Charles Babbage in the BibHotheque Universelle de Geneve. Shortly after its appearance, Babbage later wrote, the “Countess of Lovelace informed me that she had translated the memoir of Menabrea.” Enormously impressed by this work, Babbage invited her to join him in the development of the machine.. “I asked why she had not herself written an original paper on a subject with which she was so intimately acquainted? To this Lady Lovelace rephed that the thought had not occurred to her. I then suggested that she should add some notes to Menabrea’s memoir; an idea which was immediately adopted.”
Babbage and Ada developed an intense relationship. “We discussed together the various illustrations that might be introduced,” wrote Babbage. “I suggested several, but the selection was entirely her own. So also was the algebraic working out of the different problems, except, indeed, that relating to the numbers of BernpulH, which I had offered to do to save Lady Lovelace the trouble. This she sent back to me for an amendment, having detected a grave mistake which I had made in the process.”

“A strong-minded womanl Much like her mother, eh? Wears green spectacles and writes learned books . . . She wants

to upset the universe, and play dice with the hemispheres. Women never know when to stop ..
William Gibson and Bruce Sterling, The Difference Engine
Babbage’s mathematical errors, and many of his attitudes, gready irritated Ada. While his tendency to blame other bodies for the slow progress of his work was sometimes well founded, when he insisted on prefacing the publication of the memoir and her notes with a complaint about the attitude of the British authorities to his work, Ada refused to endorse him. “I never can or will support you in acting on principles which I consider not only wrong in themselves, but suicidal.” She declared Babbage ‘‘one of the most impracticable, selfish, & intemperate persons one can have to do with,” and laid down several severe conditions for the continuation of their collaboration. “Can you,” she asked, with undisguised impatience, “undertake to give your mind wholly and undividedly, as a primary object that no engagement is to interfere with, to die consideration of all those matters in which I shall at times require your intellectual assistance & supervision; & can you promise not to slur & hurry things over; or to mislay & allow confusion & mistakes to enter into documents &c?”
Ada was, she said, “very much afraid as yet of exciting the powers I know I have over others, Sc the evidence of which I have certainly been most unwilling to admit, in fact for a long/time considered quite fanciful and absurd ... I therefore carefully refrain from all attempts intentionally to exercise unusual powers.” Perhaps this was why her work was simply attributed to A.A.L. “It is not my wish to proclaim who has written it,” she wrote. These were just a few afterthoughts, a mere commentary on someone else’s work. But Ada did want them to bear some name: “I rather wish to append anything that may tend hereaf-

j

ter to individualize it & identify it, with other productions of the said A.A.L.” And for all her apparent modesty, Ada knew how important her notes really were. “To say the truth, I am rather amazed at them; & cannot help being struck quite malgre moi, with the really masterly nature of the style, & its Superiority to that of the Memoir itself.” Her work was indeed vasdy more influential—and three times longer—than the text to which they were supposed to be mere adjuncts. A hundred years before the hardware had been built, Ada had produced the first example of what was later called computer programming.

matrices
Distinctions between the main bodies of texts and all their peripheral detail—indices, headings, prefaces, dedications, appendices, illustrations, references, notes, and diagrams—have long been integral to orthodox conceptions of nonfiction books and articles. Authored, authorized, and authoritative, a piece of writing is its own mainstream. Its asides are backwaters which might have been—and often are—compiled by anonymous editors, secretaries, copyists, and clerks, and while they may well be providing crucial support for a text which they also connect to other sources, resources, and leads, they are also sidelined and downplayed. ^
When Ada wrote her footnotes to Menabrea’s text, her work was implicitly supposed to be reinforcing these hierarchical divisions between centers and margins, authors and scribes. Menabrea’s memoir was the leading article; Ada’s work was merely a compilation of supporting detail, secondary commentary, material intended to back the author up. But her notes

made enormous leaps of both quantity and quality beyond a text which turned out merely to be providing the occasion for her work.
Only when digital networks arranged themselves in threads and links did footnotes begin to walk all over what had once been (he bodies of organized texts. Hypertext programs and (he Net are webs of footnotes without central points, organizing principles, hierarchies. Such networks are unprecedented in terms of their scope, complexity, and the pragmatic possibilities of their use. And yet they are also—and have always been—immanent to all and every piece of written work. “The frontiers of a book,” wrote Michel Foucault long before these modes of writing hypertext or retrieving data from the Net emerged, “are never clear-cut: beyond the tide, the first lines, and the last full stop, beyond its internal configuration and its autonomous form, it is caught up in a system of references to other books, other texts, other sentences: it is a node within network.”
Such complex patterns of cross-referencing have become increasingly possible, and also crucial to dealing with the floods of data which have burst the banks of traditional modes of arranging and retrieving information and are now leaking through the covers of articles and books, seeping past the boundaries of the old disciplines, overflowing all the classifications and orders of libraries, schools, and universities. And the sheer weight of data with which (he late twentieth century finds itself awash is only (he beginning of the pressures under which traditional media are buckling. If the “treatment of an irregular and complex topic cannot be forced in any single direction without curtailing the potential for transfer,” it has suddenly become obvious (hat no topic is as regular and simple as was once assumed. Reality does not rim along the neat straight lines of the

printed page. Only by “criss-crossing the complex topical landscape” can the “twin goals of highlighting mnltifacetedness and establishing multiple connections” even begin to be attained. Hypertext makes it possible for “single (or even small numbers of) connecting threads” to be assembled into a “ ‘woven’ interconnectedness” in which “strength of connection derives from the partial overlapping of many different strands of connectedness across cases rather than from any single strand running through large numbers of cases ...”
“It must be evident how multifarious and how mutually complicated are the considerations,” wrote Ada in her own footnotes. “There are frequently several distinct sets of effects going on simultaneously; all in a manner independent of each other, and yet to a greater or less degree exercising a mutual influence. To adjust each to every other, and indeed even to preceive and trace them out with perfect correctness and success, entails difficulties whose nature partakes to a certain extent of those involved in every question where conditions are very numerous and inter-complicated; such as for instance the estimation of the mutual relations amongst statistical phenomena, and of those involved in many other classes of facts.”
She added, “All, and everything is naturally related and interconnected. A volume I could write on this subject.”
tensions
Just as individuated texts have become filaments of infinitely tangled webs, so the digital machines of the late twentieth century weave new networks from what were once isolated words, numbers, music, shapes, smells, tactile textures, architectures.

and countless channels as yet unnamed. Media become interactive and hyperactive, the multiplicitous components of an immersive zone which “does not begin with writing; it is directly related rather to the weaving of elaborate figured silks.” The yarn is neither metaphorical nor literal, but quite simply material, a gathering of threads which twist and turn through die history of computing, technology, the sciences and arts. In and out of the punched holes of automated looms, up and down through the ages of spinning and weaving, back and forth through the fabrication of fabrics, shuttles and looms, cotton and silk, canvas and paper, brushes and pens, typewriter^ carriages, telephone wires, synthetic fibers, electrical filaments. silicon strands, fiber-optic cables, pixeled screens, telecom lines, the World Wide Web, the Net, and matrices to come.
“Before you run out the door, consider two things:
The future Is already set, only the past can be changed, and If It was worth forgetting. It's not worth remembering. ”
Pat Cadlgan, Foots
When the first of the cyberpunk novels, William Gibson’s Neuromancer was published in 1984, the cyberspace it described was neither an actually existing plane, nor a zone plucked out of the thin airs of myth and fantasy. It was a virtual reality which was itself increasingly real. Personal computers were becoming as ubiquitous as telephones, military simulation technologies and telecommunications networks were known to be highly sophisticated, and arcade games were addictive and increasingly immersive. Neuromancer was a fiction, and also another piece of the jigsaw which allowed these components to converge. In the course of the next decade, computers lost their significance as

isolated calculators and word processors to become nodes of the vast global network called the Net. Video, still images, sounds, voices, and texts fused into the interactive multimedia which now seemed destined to converge with virtual reality helmets and data suits, sensory feedback mechanisms and neural connections, immersive digital realities continuous with reality itself. Whatever that was now supposed to be.
At the time, it was widely assumed that machines ran on more or less straightforward lines. Fictions might be speculative and inspire particular developments, but they were not supposed to have such immediate effects. Like all varieties of cultural change, technological development was supposed to proceed step after step and one at a time. It was only logical, after all. But cyberspace changed all this. It suddenly seemed as if all the components and tendencies which were now feeding into this virtual zone had been made for it before it had even been named; as though all the ostensible reasons and motivations underlying their development had merely provided occasions for the emergence of a matrix which Gibson’s novel was nudging into place; as though the present was being reeled into a future which had always been guiding the past, washing back over precedents completely unaware of its influence.
Neuromancer was neither the first nor the last of such confusions between fiction and fact, future and past. When Gibson described '“bright lattices of logic unfolding across that colorless void,” his cyberspace was already implementing earlier—or later—works of nonfiction: Alan Turing’s universal machine had drawn the devices of his day—calculators and typewriters— into a virtual system which brought itself on-line in the Second World War; Ada’s Analytical Engine, which backed the punched-card processes of the automated weaving machine;

and Jacquaid’s loom, which gathered itself on the gathering threads of weavers who in turn were picking up on the threads of the spiders and moths and webs of bacterial activity.

on the cards

Until the early eighteenth century, when mechanisms which allowed looms to automatically select their own threads were introduced, it could take a weaver “two or three weeks to set up a drawloom for a particular pattern.” The new devices used punched-paper rolls, and then punched cards which, when they were strung together in the early nineteenth century, made the loom into the first piece of automated machinery. It was Joseph Marie Jacquard, a French engineer, who made this final move. “Jacquard devised the plans of connecting each group of threads that were to act together, with a distinct lever belonging exclusively to that group. All these levers terminate in rods” and a “rectangular sheet of pasteboard” moves “with it all the rods of the bundle, and consequently the threads that are connected with each of them.” And if this board, “instead of being plain, were pierced with holes corresponding to the extremities of the levers which meet it, then, since each of the levers would pass through the pasteboard during the motion of the latter, they would all remain in their places. We thus see that it is easy so to determine the position of the holes in the pasteboard, that, at any given moment, there shall be a certain number of levers, and consequently parcels of threads, raised, while the rest remain where they were. Supposing this process is successively repeated according to a law indicated by the pattern to be

■ 

executed, we perceive that this pattern may be reproduced on the stuff.”
As a weaving system which “effectively withdrew control of the weaving process from human workers and transferred it to the hardware of the machine,” the Jacquard loom was “bitterly opposed by workers who saw in this migration of control a piece of their bodies literally being transferred to the machine. ” The new frames were famously broken by Luddite rioters to whom, in his maiden speech in the House of Lords in 1812, Lord Byron offered his support. “By the adoption of one species of frame in particular,” he said, “one man performed the work of many, and the superfluous laborers were thrown out of employment. Yet it is to be observed that the work thus executed was inferior in quality; not marketable at home, and merely hurried over with a view to exportation. It was called, in the cant of the trade, by the name of ‘Spider-work.’ ”
Byron was concerned that his peers in the Lords would think him “too lenient towards these men, & half ajramebreaker myself.” But, unfortunately for both his argument and the handloom weavers who were thrown out of work, the fabrics woven on the new looms soon surpassed both the quantity and quality of those which had been made by hand. And the Spider- work did not stop here. These automated processes were only hints as to the new species Byron’s daughter had in store.
“I do not believe that my father was (or ever could have been) such a Poet as I shall be an Analyst.”
Ada Lovelace, July 1843
Babbage had a long-standing interest in the effects of automated machines on traditional forms of manufacture, publishing his research on the fate of cottage industries in the Midlands and

North of England, The Economy of Manufactures and Machinery, in 1832. The pin factory with which Adam Smith had illustrated his descriptions of the division of labor had made a great impression on him and, like his near contemporary Marx, he could see the extent to which specialization, standardization, and systematization had made both factories and economies into enormous automated machines themselves. Babbage was later to look back on the early factories as prototype “thinking machines,” and he compared the two main functions of the Analytical Engine—storage and calculation—to the basic components of a textiles plant. “The Analytical Engine consists of two parts,” wrote Babbage. “1st. The store in which all the variables to be operated upon, as well as all those quantities which have arisen from the result of other operations, are placed,” and “2nd. The mill into which the quantities about to be operated upon are always brought.” Like the computers which were later to run, and still do, the Engine had a store and mill, memory and processing power.
It was the Jacquard loom which really excited and inspired this work. Babbage owned a portrait of Jacquard, woven on one of his looms at about 1,000 threads to the inch and its production had demanded the use of some 24,000 punched cards, each one capable of carrying over 1,000 punch-holes, and Babbage was fascinated by the fine-grained complexity of both the cloth and the machine which had woven it. “It is a known fact,” he wrote, “that the Jacquard loom is capable of weaving any design which the imagination of man may conceive.” The portrait was a five-feet-square “sheet of woven silk, framed and glazed, but looking so perfectly like an engraving, that it had been mistaken for such by two members of the Royal Academy.”
While it was “generally supposed that the Difference Engine, after it had been completed up to a certain point, suggested

the idea of the Analytical Engine; and that the second is in fact the improved offspring of the first, and grew out of the existence of its predecessor,” Ada insisted that the Analytical Engine was an entirely new machine: “the ideas which led to the Analytical Engine occurred in a manner wholly independent of the latter engine, and might equally have occurred had it never existed nor been even thought of at all.” The Difference Engine could “do nothing but add; and any other processes, not excepting those of simple subtraction, multiplication and division, can be performed by it only just to that extent in which it is possible, by judicious mathematical arrangement and artifices, to reduce them to a series of additions.” As such, it is “the embodying of one particular and very limited set of operations, which . . . maybe expressed thus (+,+,+,+,+,+), or thus, 6 (+). Six repetitions of the one operation, +, is, in fact, the whole sum and object of that engine.” But if the Difference Engine could simply add up, the Analytical Engine was capable of performing the “whole of arithmetic.”
Women can’t add, he said once, Jokingly. When I asked him what he meant, he said, For them, one and one and one and one don’t make four.
What do they make? I said, expecting five or three.
Just one and one and one and one, he said.
Margaret Atwood, The Handmaid’s Tale
“If we compare together the powers and the principles of construction of the Difference and of the Analytic Engines,” she wrote, “we shall perceive that the capabilities of the latter are immeasurably more extensive than those of the former, and that they in fact hold to each other the same relationship as that of analysis to arithmetic.” It was, as Babbage wrote, “a machine of

the most general nature.” This machine could not merely synthesize the data already provided by its operator, as the Difference Engine had done, but would incarnate what Ada Lovelace described as the very “science of operations.”

second sight
Babbage’s attempts to build an adding machine were not without precedent. Wilhelm Leibniz’s seventeenth-century Stepped Reckoner was marketed on the basis that it would “be desirable to all who are engaged in computations . . . the managers of financial affairs, the administrators of others’ estates, merchants, surveyors, geographers, navigators, astronomers, and those connected with any of the crafts that use mathematics.” His work was in part inspired by the Pascaline, developed by Blaise Pascal in 1642. This machine used rotating wheels and a ratchet to perform addition and subtraction and was also designed as a device “by means of which you alone may, without any effort, perform all the operations of arithmetic, and may be relieved of all the work which has often times fatigued your spirit when you have worked with the counters or with the pen.”
While Babbage’s Difference Engine had already improved on these earlier designs, the Analytical Engine was a vasdy superior machine. And it was, as Ada wrote, “the introduction of the principle which Jacquard devised for regulating, by means for punched cards, the most complicated patterns in the fabrication of brocaded stuffs,” which gave the Analytical Engine its “distinctive characteristic” and “rendered it possible to endow mechanism with such extensive faculties as bid fair to make this engine the executive right-hand of abstract algebra.

“The mode of application of the cards, as hitherto used in the art of weaving, was not found, however, to be sufficiently powerful for all the simplifications which it was desirable to attain in such varied and complicated processes as those required in order to fulfil the purposes of an Analytical Engine. A method was devised of what was technically designated backing the cards in certain groups according to certain laws. The object of this extension is to secure the possibility of bringing any particular card or set of cards into use any number of times successively in the solution of one problem.” This sophistication of the punched-card system caused “the prism over which the train of pattern cards is suspended to revolve backwards instead of forwards, at pleasure, under the requisite circumstances; until, by so doing, any particular card, or set of cards, that has done duty once; and passed on in the ordinary regular succession, is brought back to the position it occupied just before it was used the preceding time. The prism then resumes its forward rotation, and thus brings the card or set of cards in question into play a second time.” The cards were selected by the machine as it needed them, and effectively functioned as a filing system, a means of storage and retrieval which allowed the engine to draw on its own information as required without having to make a linear run through all its cards.
“There is no limit to the number of cards that can be used. Certain stuff require for their fabrication not less than twenty thousand cards,” and because their repetition “reduces to an immense extent the number of cards required,” the Engine could “far exceed even this quantity.” This was an improvement “especially applicable wherever cycles occur in mathematical operations,” so that “in preparing data for calculations by the engine,” wrote Ada, “it is desirable to arrange the order and combination of the processes with a view to obtain them as

much as possible symmetrically and in cycles.” Ada defined any “recurring group” as “a cycle. A cycle of operations, then, must be understood to signify any set of operations which is repeated more than once. It is equally a cycle, whether it be repeated twice only, or an indefinite number of times; for it is the fact of a repetition occurring at all that constitutes it such. In many cases of analysis there is a recurring group of one or more cycles; that is, a cycle of a cycle, or a cycle of cycles ...”
The Engine’s capacity to circulate its data also meant that it was always “eating its own tail,” as Babbage described it, so that “the results of the calculation appearing in the table column might be made to affect the other columns, and thus change the instructions set into the machine.” The Engine “could make judgements by comparing numbers and then act upon the result of its comparisons—thus proceeding upon lines not uniquely specified in advance by the machine’s instructions.”
When Babbage had talked about the Analytical Engine’s ability to anticipate the outcomes of calculations it had not yet made, it was felt that his “intellect was beginning to become deranged.” But Babbage’s forward thinking was not a patch on Ada’s own anticipative powers. “I do not think you possess half m y forethought, & power of seeing all possible contingencies (probable & improbable, just alike),” she told Babbage.
“I am a Prophetess bom Into the world, & this conviction fills me with humility, with fear and trembling!”
Ada Lovelace, November 1844
Ada hoped that the difficulties in the way of constructing either the Difference Engine or the Analytical Engine “will not ultimately result in this generation’s being acquainted with these inventions through the medium of pen, ink, and paper merely,”

but she also had no doubt that the immediate construction of the machine was not the only key to its influence. Any such development, she writes, will have “various collateral influences, beside the main and primary object attained.” And “in so distributing and combining the truths and the formulae of analysis, that they may become most easily and rapidly amenable to the mechanical combinations of the engine, the relations and the nature of many subjects in that science are necessarily thrown into new lights, and more profoundly investigated. This is a decidedly indirect, and a somewhat speculative, consequence of such an invention. It is however pretty evident, on general principles, that in devising for mathematical truths a new form in which to record and throw themselves out for actual use, views are likely to be induced, which should again react on the more theoretical phase of the subject.”
The Engine was left on the nineteenth-century drawing board, and it was a hundred years before anything akin to Ada’s software would find the hardware on which to run. Even the most interested parties tend to think that Ada, for all her foresight, had no influence on the machines which were to come, regarding both her programs and the Analytical Engine itself as aberrant works of genius so untimely as to be more or less irrelevant to the future course of the machines.
But technical developments are rarely simple matters of cause and effect, and Ada was right to assume that the Engine would have more than an immediate influence. While they may have left few trails of the kind which can easily be followed and packaged into neat and linear historical accounts, Ada and her software did not evaporate. The programs began to run as soon as she assembled them.
Lack of public support, funding, Babbage’s own eccentricities, and ill health all contributed to the abandonment of the

machine. But the greatest obstacle to the construction of the Analytical Engine was simply technical capacity. The Engine demanded an attention to both precision and abstraction which earlier, single-purpose machines had not required, and for all its sophistication, nineteenth-century engineering was neither accurate nor diverse enough to produce even the machines capable of manufacturing the components for such a machine. While Henry Maudslay, for example, had developed screw cutting at the end of the eighteenth century, the absence of universal standards for its threads constituted an enormous obstacle to the construction of a machine as precise as the Analytical Engine. But if the Analytical Engine suffered at the time for the want of precision engineering, it also played a leading role in the development of the capacity necessary to its own construction. An 1846 reference work on the lathe included Babbage’s “On the Principles of Tools for Turning and Planing Metals” and, eager to acquire the components, Babbage collaborated with a number of engineers, including Joseph Clement, who had worked with Maudslay on the first mechanized lathes, and Joseph Whitworth, whose 1841 paper “On a Universal System of Screw Threads” was already a consequence of Babbage’s exacting demands for his machines. This text also triggered a process of standardization which was in widespread use by the late 1850s and was crucial to all subsequent engineering, scientific experiment, and of course, computing itself. The Engine was assembling the processes and components from which it would eventually be built.
The Analytical Engine also fed back into the practices from which it had most immediately emerged. It was, wrote Ada, such a superb development of automated weaving that its discoveries were used “for the reciprocal benefit of that art.” The “introduction of the system of backing into the Jacquard-

loom itself” meant that “patterns which should possess symmetry, and following regular laws of any extent, might be woven by means of comparatively few cards.”
"Unbuttoning the coat, he thrust his hands Into the trouser- pockets, the better to display the waistcoat, which was woven In a dizzy mosaic of tiny blue-and-whlte squares. Ada Chequers, the tailors called them, the Lady having created the pattern by programming a Jacquard loom to weave pure algebra
William Gibson and Bruce Sterling, The Difference Engine

anna 1
In 1933, Sigmund Freud made his final attempt to solve the riddle of femininity: “to those of you who are women,” he wrote, “this will not apply—you are yourselves the problem.” Having dealt with its wants and deficiencies and analyzed its lapses and absences, he had only a few more points to make. “It seems,” he wrote, “that women have made few contributions to the inventions and discoveries of the history of civilization.” They lacked both the capacity and the desire to change the wprld. They weren’t logical, they couldn’t think straight, they flitted around and couldn’t concentrate.
Distracted by the rhythmic beat of a machine, Freud looked up to see his daughter at her loom. She had wandered off, she was miles away, lost in her daydreams and the shuttle’s flight. But the sight of her gave him second thoughts. When he took up the thread, he had changed his mind: “There is, how-

ever, one technique which they may have invented—that of plaiting and weaving.
“If that is so, we should be tempted to guess the unconscious motive for the achievement,” he writes. “Nature herself would seem to have given the model which this achievement imitates by causing the growth at maturity of the pubic hair that conceals the genitals. The step that remained to be taken lay in making the threads adhere to one another, while on the body they stick into the skin and are only matted together.” Since she has only a hole where the male has his source of creativity, the folding and interlacing of threads cannot be a question of a thrusting male desire. Unless she was hiding something else, the processes which so engrossed her must, of course, be a matter of concealing the shameful “deficiency” of the female sex.
Take Anna: a weaver and a spinster too, working to cover her wounded pride, her missing sense of self, the holes in her life and the gaps in her mind. She simply doesn’t have what it takes to make a difference to the civilized world. Her work is a natural compensation for a natural flaw. All she can discover is her own incompletion; all she can invent are ways and means to process and conceal her sense of shame.
If weaving was to count as an achievement, it was not even one of women’s own. Their work is not original or creative: both the women and their cloths are simply copying the matted tangles of pubic hair. Should they have pretensions to authority, they would only be faking this as well. Women “can, it seems, (only) imitate nature. Duplicate what nature offers and produces. In a kind of technical assistance and substitution.” Weaving is an automatic imitation of some bodily function already beyond the weaver’s control. She is bound to weave a costume for the masquerade: she is an actress, a mimic, an impersonator, with no authenticity underneath it all. She has nothing to re-

veal, no soul to bare, not even a sex or a self to please. He pulls aside the veils, the webs of lies, the shrouds of mystery, and the layers of deception and duplicity, and finds no comfort, no there there. Only “the horror of nothing to be seen.” Good of her to cover it up for him.
This tale of absence, castration, deficiency, negativity, substitution was composed by one whom Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari describe as “an overconscious idiot who has no understanding of multiplicities.” From Freud’s point of view, there is one and its other, which is simply what one sees of it. And what one sees is nothing at all. “Because the path it traces is invisible and becomes visible only in reverse, to the extent that it is travelled over and covered by the phenomena it induces within the system, it has no place other than that from which it is ‘missing,’ no identity other than that which it lacks.”
Anna Freud’s biographer describes her as a woman who “specialized in reversals, in making the absent present, the lost found, the past current . . . she could also make the undone done, or—even more valuable—doable. When she was tired and faced with a stack of letters to answer, for example, she would simply set her pen down on a blank page and scurry it along, making quick mountain ranges of scribble. Then she would sign her name under the rows of scribble in her characteristic way, as one flourishing word: annafreud.”
After that, it was downhill all the way. “Having thus written a letter in fantasy with complete ease, she wrote a real letter helped by the sense that the task was accomplished anyway.” It’s easy to complete a job already done. “Her lectures were composed in the same way. First she lectured in her imagination, enjoying the thunderous applause, and then she made an outline of what she had said, adjusting it if she needed to for greater simplicity and coherence. Later, with her outline in hand, she

would give die lecture extempore. The method—if it can be called that—also supplemented her pleasure in sprints of thought. Intellectually she was ... a quick sketcher.”
No doubt Freud despaired at such unorthodox approaches to her work. It seemed she did everything in reverse, backward, upside down, contrary to any rational approach. But if Anna’s techniques appeared to be the random tactics of a scattered brain, knowing something backward and inside out is far in advance of any straightforward procedure. And she was hardly alone in her topsy-turvy ways. This ability to win “victories in advance, as if acquired on credit” may not figure in the history of discoveries and inventions familiar to Freud, but this is only because it underlies the entire account. According to Marshall McLuhan, “the technique of beginning at the end of any operation whatever, and of working backwards from that point to the beginning’’ was not merely an invention or discovery to be added to the list: it was “the invention of invention” itself.
This is hysteresis, the lagging of effects behind their causes. Reverse engineering: the way hackers hack and pirates conspire to lure the future to their side. Starting at the end, and then engaging in a process which simultaneously assembles and dismantles the route back to the start, the end, the future, the past: who’s counting now? As Ada said, she “did everything topsyturvy, & certainly ought to have come into the world feet downwards. ” Mere discoveries were not enough for her: “I intend to incorporate with one department of my labours a complete reduction to a system, of the principles and methods of discovery. ”
The prevalence of these backward moves is not the least of the reasons why histories of technology—and indeed histories of anything at all—are always riddled with delicious gaps, mysteries, and riddles just like those perplexing Freud. No straight-

forward account can ever hope to deal with the tactical advantages gained by such disorderings of linear time. The names and dates and jrreat achievements of the Read Only Memory called history may enjoy their fifteen kilobytes of digital fame on the latest encyclopedic compact disc, but what announce themselves to be founding fathers, points of origin, and defining moments only ever serve as distractions from the ongoing processes, the shifting differences that count. These are subtle and fine grained, often incognito, undercover, in disguise as mere and minor details. If, that is, they show themselves at all.
"Ada's method, as will appear, was to weave daydreams Into seemingly authentic calculations.”
Doris Langley Moore, Ada, Countess of Lovelace

gambling on the future
“That you are a peculiar—very peculiar—specimen of the feminine race, you are yourself aware.” They called her “wayward, wandering . . . deluded.” She didn’t argue; she seemed not to care. “The woman brushed aside her veil, with a swift gesture of habit” and, as though responding to Sigmund Freud, said, “There is at least some amusement in being so curious a riddle.” She didn’t have a name to call her own, but she did have many avatars: Ada Augusta King, Countess of Lovelace; Ada Lovelace, nee Byron; A.A.L., the first programmer. She is also Ada, the language of the United States military machine. “She is the Queen of Engines, the Enchantress of Number.”
Soon after Ada’s birth, Lord Byron went his own opiated way, and Lady Byron brought her daughter up with all the

excesses of stringent discipline to which well-bred girls were supposed to be subject. After rumors of a scandalous affair, she married William, a man in his thirties, when she was still in her teens, and became Ada King in 1835. Three years later, when William inherited his father’s title, she became a countess in name as well as deed.
When she married, her mother instructed her to bid “adieu to your old companion Ada Byron with all her peculiarities, caprices, and self-seeking; determined that as A.K. you will live for others.” She tried to be the dutiful daughter and did her best to lead a domesticated life. She was the mother of two boys and a girl by the age of twenty-four. But it wasn’t long before she was describing her children as “irksome duties Sc nothing more.” Although she had “wished for heirs,” she had never “desired a child,” and described herself as having a “total deficiency in all natural love of children.” She wrote, “To tell the honest truth I feel the children much more nuisance than pleasure & cannot help remembering that I am not naturally or originally fond of children.” She wrote of her husband with affection, describing him as “my chosen pet, ” but also expressed her indifference to any "mortal husband,” even her own. “No man would suit me,” she wrote, “tho’ some might be a shade or two less personally repugnant to me than others.”
One of Ada’s most long-standing and trustworthy friends was the acclaimed mathematician Mary Somerville, who had published the Connection of the Physical Sciences in the early 1830s. Just after her marriage she wrote to Mary, “I now read Mathematics every day, & am occupied on Trigonometry & in preliminaries to Cubic and Biquadratic Equations. So you see that matrimony has by no means lessened my taste for these pursuits, nor my determination to carry them on.” She also gained many new interests after her children were born. She lost

thousands at the races and, seduced by her mathematical prowess and her reassurances that she really did have “a system,” many of her male companions were also encouraged to do the same. This was an illegitimate use of her already dubious interest in mathematics. “The passions suffer no less by this gaming fever than the understandings and the imagination. What vivid, unnatural hope and fear, joy and anger, sorrow and discontent burst out all at once upon a roll of the dice, a turn of the card, a run of the shining gurneys! Who can consider without indignation that all those womanly affections, which should have been consecrated to children and husband, are thus vilely prostituted and thrown away. I cannot but be grieved when I see the Gambling Lady fretting and bleeding inwardly from such evil and unworthy obsessions; when I behold the face of an angel agitated by the heart of a fury!”
Ada was ill for much of her short life, walking with crutches until the age of seventeen, and endlessly subject to the fits, swellings, faints, asthmatic attacks, and paralyses which were supposed to characterize hysteria. “Heaven knows what intense suffering & agony I have gone thro’; & how mad & how reckless & desperate I have at times felt,” she wrote. “There has been no end to the manias & whims I have been subject to, & which nothing but the most resolute determination on my part could have mastered.”
Like many of her ailing contemporaries, Ada had been subjected to a variety of treatments before she developed an “opium system” in the 1840s. This was supposed to bring her down, but it only added to her volatility. “No more laudanum has been taken as yet,” she wrote at one point. “But I doubt another twenty-four hours going over without. I am beginning to be excited, & my eyes burn again.” She would, she wrote, take laudanum “not for ever,” but “as a regular thing once or

twice a week.” The drug had “a remarkable effect on my eyes, seeming to free them, & to make them open & cool. ” In opium lay the vast expanses, orders, and harmonies conjured by mathematics: “It makes me so philosophical,” she wrote, “& so takes off all fretting eagerness & anxieties. It appears to harmonize the whole constitution, to make each function act in a just proportion; (with judgment, discretion, moderation).” Her doctor “seems to think it is not a mere palliative but has a far more radical effect. Since this last dose, I am inclined to think so myself . . . It is a pity that instead of ordering Claret some months ago, he had not advised laudanum or Morphine. I think he has got the thing at last.”
In 1851 a uterine examination revealed “a very deep and extensive ulceration of the womb” which her doctor thought must long have been “the cause of much derangement of health.” She died in 1852 at the age of thirty-six.
They called her complex of diseases hysteria, a diagnosis and a term which indicated wayward reproductive organs: hysteria is derived from the Greek word hystera, and means ‘wandering womb.’ There was a time when it was widely believed that “the womb, though it be so strictly attached to the parts we have described that it may not ehange place, yet often changes position, and makes curious and so to speak petulant movements in the woman’s body. These movements are various: to wit, ascending, descending, convulsive, vagrant, prolapsed. The womb rises to the liver, spleen, diaphragm, stomach, breast, heart, lung, gullet, and head.” Although such direct connections with the womb had fallen out of medical favor by the end of the nineteenth century, hysteria continued to be associated with notions of a wandering womb.
“There is in my nervous system,” wrote Ada, “such utter want of all ballast & steadiness, that I cannot regard my life or

powers as other than precarious.” They said she was a nervous system apparendy unable to setde down. She had what she described as a “vast mass of useless & irritating POWER. OF EXPRESSION which longs to have full scope in active manifestation such as neither the ordinary active pursuits or duties of life, nor the literary line of expression, can give vent to.” She couldn’t concentrate, flitting between obsessions, resdess, searching. At one point she declared, “There is no pleasure in way of exercise equal to that of feeling one’s horse flying under one. It is even better than waltzing.” At another the harp was her greatest love: “I play 4 & 5 hours generally, & never less than 3. I am never tired at the end of it.” Drama was another contender: “Clearly the only one which directs my Hysteria from all its mischievous & irritating channels.” But even this was a short-lived love: “I never would look to the excellence of mere representation being satisfactory to me as an ultimate goal, or exclusive object ...”
Ada was hunting for something that would do more than represent an existing world. Something that would work: something new, somethingelse. Even the doctors agreed that she needed “peculiar & artificial excitements, as a matter of safety even for your life & happiness.” Such stimulations simply did not exist. She had to engineer them to suit herself.
Hysterics were said to have “a hungry look about them.” Like all Luce Irigaray’s women, “what they desire is precisely nothing, and at the same time, everything. Always something more and something else besides that one—sexual organ, for example—that you give them, attribute to them”; something which “involves a different economy more than anything else, one that upsets the linearity of a project, undermines the goal- object of a desire, diffuses the polarization towards a single pleasure, disconcerts fidelity to a single discourse ...”

Ada was by turns sociable and reclusive, cautious and reckless, swinging between megalomaniac delight in her own brilliance and terrible losses of self-esteem. There had been times when she had almost given into the fashionable belief that overexertion of the intellect lay at the root of her hysteria. At one point she wrote, “Many causes have contributed to produce the past derangements; & I shall in future avoid them. One ingredient (but only one among many) has been too much Mathematics.” Not even countesses were supposed to count. But Ada could be very determined, proud of her own staying power, and sometimes absolutely convinced of her mathematical, musical, and experimental genius. “I am proceeding on a track quite peculiar and my own,” she wrote. “I mean to do what I mean to do.” In 1834 she explained that “nothing but very close & intense application to subjects of a scientific nature now seems at all to keep my imagination from running wild, or to stop up the void which seems to be left in my mind from a want of excitement.” And in spite of the prevailing opinion that numbers were bad for her, she was never coaxed into “dropping the thread of science. Mathematics &c. These may be still my ultimate vocation.”

binaries
The postwar settlement was supposed to mark the dawn of a new era of regulation and control: the Central Intelligence Agency, United Nations, welfare states, mixed economies, and balanced superpowers. This was a brave new equilibrated world of self-guiding stability, pharmaceutical tranquillity, white goods, nuclear families, Big Brother screens, and, to keep these

new shows on die road, vast new systems of machinery capable of recording, calculating, storing, and processing everything that moved. Fueled by a complex of military goals, corporate interests, solid-state economies, and industrial-strength testosterone, computers were supposed to be a foolproof means to the familiar ends of social security, political organization, economic or- - der, prediction, and control. Centralized, programmable systems running on impeccably logical lines, these new machines were supposed to make the most complex processes straightforward; But even in the most prosaic terms, this supposedly logical, directed, and controlled of zones has always been wildly unpredictable. In 1950. when the processing power which can now be inscribed on the surface of a silicon chip occupied vast air-conditioned rooms. IBM thought the total global market for computers was five. In 1951 the United States Census Bureau put UNI VAC to work, the Bank of America installed Electronic Recording Machine Accounting (ERMA), and by 1957, when the Type 650 was launched, IBM anticipated sales of somewhere between fifty and 250. Two years later some 2,000 computers were in use in government agencies and private companies, and the figures were drastically revised. Perhaps 200,000 computers would be sufficient to saturate the market. By the early 1990s, IBM alone was selling twice that number of systems a week.
Computers have continued to pursue these accelerating, exponential paths, proliferating, miniaturizing, stringing themselves together into vast telecommunications nets, embedding themselves in an extraordinary variety of commodities, becoming increasingly difficult to define. While the postwar prnpram- mable computers were composed of transistors which used sihcon as a semiconductor of electric current, hv the end of the 1950s. tbf integrated circuit connected the transistors and in-

scribed them a single wafer of silicon. In the same vein of exponential miniaturization, the microprocessor was developed in the early 1970s. effectively putting all solid-state circuits of a computer onto a single silicon chip. The screen migrated IromthieTV set to give the machine a monitor, and by the 1980s what had once been vast room-size systems without windows on the world were desktop microprocessors.
"The calculations taking place within the machine are continuously registered as clicks clicking high-pitched sounds as of tinkling bells, noises like those of a cash-register. There are lights that go out and come on at Irregular Intervals of time. They are red orange blue. The apertures through which they shine are circular. Every divergence Is ceaselessly recorded In the machine. They are scaled to the same unit whatever their nature.”
Monique Wlttlg, Lbs GuMIlires
Whether they are gathering information, telecommunicating, running washing machines, doing sums, or making videos, all digital computers translate information into the zeros and ones of machine code. These binary digits are known as hits and strung together in bytes of eight. The zeros and ones of machine code seem to offer themselves as perfect symbols of the orders of Western reality, the ancient logical codes which make the difference between on and off, right and left, light and dark, form and matter, mind and body, white and black, good and evil, right and wrong, life and death, something and nothing, this and that, here and there, inside and out, active and passive, true and false, ves and no, sanity and madness, health and sickness.. up and down, sense and nonsense, west and east, north and south. And they made a lovely couple when it came to sex. Man

and woman, male and female, masculine and feminine: one and zeio looked just right, made for each other: 1, the definite, upright line; and 0, the diagram of nothing at all: penis and vagina, thing and hole . . . hand in glove. A perfect match.
It takes two to make a binary, but all these pairs are two of a kind, and the kind is always kind of one. 1 and 0 make another 1. Male and female add up to man. There is no female equivalent. No universal woman at his side. The male is one, one is everything, and the female has “nothing you can see.” Woman “functions as a hole, ” a gap, a space, “a nothing—that is a nothing the same, identical, identifiable ... a fault, a flaw, a lack, an absence, outside the system of representations and autorepresentations.” Lacan lavs down the law and leaves no doubt: “There is woman only as excluded by the nature of things,” he explains. She is “not-all,” “not-whole,” “not-one,” and whatever she knows can only be described as “not-knowledge.” There is “no such thing as The woman, where the definite article stands for the universal.” She has no place like home. nothing of her own, “other than the place of the Other which.” writes Lacan, “I designate with a capital O.”

supporting evidence
Man once made himself the point of everything. He organized, she operated. He ruled, she served. He made the great discoveries, she busied herself in the footnotes. He wrote the books, she copied them. She was his helpmate and assistant, working in support of him, according to his plans. She did the jobs he considered mundane, often the fiddling, detailed, repetitive operations with which he couldn’t be bothered; the dirty, mind-

less, semiautomatic tasks to which he thought himself superior. He cut the cloth to fit a salary; she sewed the seams at a piece- rate wage. He dictated and she transcribed. In the newly automated factories and mills she worked on the looms and sewing machines; in the service of the great bureaucratic machines, she processed the words, kept the records, did the sums, and filed the accounts.
With “all the main avenues of life marked ‘male,’ and the female left to be female, and nothing else,” men were the ones who could do anything. Women were supposed to be singlepurpose systems, highly programmed, predetermined systems tooled up and fit for just one thing. They have functioned as “an ‘infrastructure’ unrecognized as such by our society and our culture. The use, consumption, and circulation of their sexual- ized bodies underwrite the organization and the reproduction of the social order, in which they have never taken part as ‘subjects.’ ” Everything depends on their complicity: women are the very “possibility of mediation, transaction, transition,
transference—between man and his fellow-creatures, indeed
_ •
between man and himself.” Women have been his go- betweens, those who took his messages, decrypted his codes, counted his numbers, bore his children, and passed on his genetic code. They have worked as his bookkeepers and his memory banks, zones of deposit and withdrawal, promissory notes, credit and exchange, not merely servicing the social world, but underwriting reality itself. Goods and chattels. The property of man.
That’s what it said in the manual. “It does strike me, though, that there are any number of women who resemble Lady Ada, our Queen of Engines being a queen of fashion as well. Thousands of women follow her mode.”
It takes time and patience. Many seconds pass. But, as it

turns out, women have not merely had a minor part to play in the emergence of the digital machines. When computers were vast systems of transistors and valves which needed to be coaxed into action, it was women who turned them on. They have not made some trifling contribution to an otherwise man-made tale; when computers became the miniaturized circuits of silicon chips, it was women who assembled them. Theirs is not asubsidiary role which needs to be rescued for posterity, a small supplement whose inclusion would set the existing records straight: wfren computers were virtnallv real machines, women wrote the software on which they ran. And when computer was a term applied to flesh and blood workers, the bodies which composed them were female. Hardware, software, wetware— before their beginnings and beyond their ends, women have been the simulators, assemblers, and programmers of the digital machines.

genderquake
"The Idea that a ‘nothing to be seen’. . . might yet have some reality, would Indeed be Intolerable to man.”
Luce Irigaray, Speculum of the Other Woman

In the 1990s, Western cultures were suddenly struck by an extraordinary sense of volatility in all matters sexual: differences, relations, identities, definitions, roles, attributes, means, and ends. All the old expectations, stereotypes, senses of identity and security faced challenges which have left many women with unprecedented economic opportunities, technical skills, cul-

tural powers, and highly rated qualities, and many men in a world whose contexts range from alien to unfamiliar.
This was neither a revolutionary break, nor an evolutionary reform, but something running on far more subtle, wide- ranging, and profound fault lines. Nothing takes the final credit—or the blame—for this shift which, as though in recognition of the extent to which it defies existing notions of cultural change, has been defined as genderquake. But the new machines, media, and means of telecommunication that compose what are variously called high, information, digital, or simply new technologies which have emerged within the last two decades have played an enormous and fascinating role in the emergence pf this new culture. This is far from a question of technological, or any other, determinism. If anything, technologies are only ever intended to maintain or improve the status quo, and certainly not to revolutionize the cultures into which they are introduced. It is in spite of their tendencies to reduce, objectify, and regulate everything that moves that computers and the networks they compose run on lines quite alien to those which once kept women in the home.
In some respects, the impact of these new machines is direct and very obvious. In the West, the decline of heavy industry, the automation of manufacturing, the emergence of the service sector, and the rise of a vast range of new manufacturing and information-processing industries have combined to reduce the importance of the muscular strength and hormonal energies which were once given such high economic rewards. In their place come demands for speed, intelligence, and transferable, interpersonal, and communications skills. At the same time, all the structures, ladders, and securities with which careers and particular jobs once came equipped have been subsumed by patterns of part-time and discontinuous work which

privilege independence, flexibility, and adaptability. These tendencies have affected skilled, unskilled, and professional workers alike. And, since the bulk of the old full-time, lifelong workforce was until recently male, it is men who have found themselves most disturbed and disrupted by these shifts, and, by the same token, women who they benefit.
These tendencies are far from new. Since the industrial revolution, and with every subsequent phase of technological change, it has been the case that the more sophisticated the machines, the more female the workforce becomes. Automa- tion has been accompanied by what is often referred to as the feminization of the workforce ever since the first automatic machines were operated by the first female workers, and the fears of unemployment which have haunted modern discussions of technological innovation have always applied to male workers rather than their female peers.
What is unprecedented is for male workers to be outnumbered by their female counterparts, as will clearly be the case in the United Kingdom and the United States by the end of this century. And with this tipping of the scales comes not only unprecedented degrees of economic power, but also a radical change in the status of female workers, an erosion of the male monopoly on tasks and jobs once reserved for men, and a new standing for the work involved in what were once considered to be pin-money jobs for women supplementing male incomes.
Many of these tendencies are also at work in the emergence of what the West was once in a position to call “the other side of the world.” By the time the cultures of the old white jworld had noticed they were even on the map, many of the so- called “tiger” nations—Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, Korea, TaiwanT and Indonesia—were already leaping ahead in an eco- nomic game which for at least two hundred years had been

governed bv the West. And they are only the tips of an iceberg of change which brings many regions into play: China, India, East and Southern Africa, Eastern Europe, South America. Given that the populations of China and India alone vasdy outnumber those of the old white world, there seems litde doubt that the days of Western empire have well and truly died.
These regions have genderquakes of their own. And while a variety of political and religious fundamentalisms are doing their best to maintain the status quo, there are few regions of the world in which women are not asserting themselves with unprecedented ingenuity and, very often, great success. If Western women have dreamt of change for three hundred years, Asian women are playing roles which would have been unthinkable 4 only a decade or so ago. By the mid-1990s, 34 percent of 0 China’s self-employed were women, and 38 percent of Singaporean women managers were running companies of their own. Thailand’s leading hotel chain, Indonesia’s largest taxi company, and Taiwan’s two largest newspaper groups were owned by women. Japanese women still found themselves treated as “office flowers,” composed only 0.3 percent of board members of Japanese firms, and made up just 6.7 percent of the Japanese parliament. But the sexual shift was also evident in Japan: 2.5 million women owned businesses, five out of every six new Japanese firms were set up by women, and “a revolution without marches or manifestos” was underway.
There is enormous resistance to these changes whenever and wherever they occur. As their effects began to be felt in the early 1990s there were men who jerked their knees and went on TV to lament the fact that women and robots had apparendy conspired to take their masculinity away. One 1990s survey found one in two fathers still believing that “a husband should be the breadwinner and the wife should look after the home

and children”; the fear, if not the fact, of violent crime still keeps many women in at night; domestic violence was prevalent; and in Britain, the benefits system was still conspiring with the high costs and scarcity of child-care provision to keep many women from working, learning, or—perish the thought—enjoying themselves. As unprecedented numbers of women juggled children, education, and work, many female workers found themselves saddled with the low paying, part-time, insecure jobs rejected by men. In the United States, almost half of employed women worked in technical, sales, and administrative support jobs, and pay differentials were still very large: in 1992 American women still earned only 75 cents for every dollar earned by men, and while their participation in U.S. managerial and professional life rose from 40 percent in 1983 to 47 percent in 1992, it was still the case that women occupied relatively few executive posts and prominent public positions: only 10 percent of the voting members of the United States Congress were women, and the United Kingdom had only sixty women members of parliament. Many sectors of education, politics, and business seemed riddled with enough archaic detail and glass ceilings to make even the most determined women feel unwelcome. In universities, they were averaging higher marks than men, but relatively few gained first-class degrees; they were more numerous and successfiol as undergraduates and in master’s programs, but less prominent when it came to Ph.D. candidacy. Even highly successftd career women were more likely to drop out of their jobs than their male counterparts.
But many women had already set their sights beyond these traditional focal points. While the members of an older male workforce had found a sense of identity in their work, women were not only less able, but also less willing to define themselves through employment or a single career. Many of them were

actively seeking opportunities to make and break their own working lives, not necessarily in favor of family commitments, but also in an effort to free themselves from the imposition of external constraints on their time and economic capacity. There may have been men who still thought they were protecting their own positions of power by locking women out of the higher echelons of the universities, corporations, and public institutions, but it was no longer obvious that top positions were the most importer nr rlf<:irafr)e of roles to be played. High grades and doctorates were no longer enough to guarantee success outside an academic world itself poised on the brink of redundancy, and corporate executives were increasinpjy small pawns in global economic games. As for the attractions of public service, who was going to disagree with the young women who said that “politics is all talk and no action”? They simply felt they had betteLihings to do.
Some of these things were fai more lucrative as well: in the twenty years after 1970, the number of women-owned small businesses went from 5 percent to 32 percent in the United States, and in Britain nearly 25 percent of the self-employed were women by 1994, twice as many as in 1980. Taking the skills, contacts, and experience gained in their periods of paid employment, these women have tended to be far more successful than their self-employed male counterparts: in the United States, where most new businesses failed, those which were owned by women enjoyed an 80 percent success rate and employed more people than the companies on the Fortune 500 list.
Having had little option but to continually explore new avenues, take risks, change jobs, learn new skills, work, independently, and drop in and out of the labor market more frequently than their male colleagues, women seem far “better prepared.

culturally and Psychologically” for the new economic conditions which have emerged at the end of the twentieth renturv. They are advanced players of an economic game for which self- employment, part-time, discontinuous work, multiskilling, flexibility, and maximal adaptability were suddenly crucial to survival. Women had been ahead of the race for all their working lives, poised to meet these changes long before they arrived, as though they always had been working in a future which their male counterparts had only just begun to glimpse. Perhaps they really were the second sex, if seconds come after firsts.
" ‘Let the man get some sleep, Armttage, ’ Molly said from her futon, the components of the hetcher spread on the silk like some expensive puzzle. ‘He’s coming apart at the seams.'"
William Gibson, Neuromancer
But there was much more to come. Abandoned by the economic power and social privilege which once made them such attractive, even necessary, mates, the sperm counts fell, birth rates crashed, and the hormonal energy and muscular strength which once served them so well were now becoming liabilities. Women were becoming mothers on their own terms, or not at all. Heterosexual relations were losing their viability, queer con- nections were flourishing, the carnival had begun for a vast range of paraphilias and so-called perversions, and if there was more than one sex to have, there were also more than two to be. Anything claiming to be normal had become peculiar.
“He was thoroughly lost now; spatial disorientation held a peculiar horror for cowboys.”

William Gibson, Neuromancer

It was falling apart. They were coming undone. Everything was moving much too fast. What had once seemed destined to become a smoothly regulated world was suddenly running away with itself. Control was slipping through the fingers of those who had thought it was in their hands. Something was wrong. They were losing it all: their senses of security and identity, their grip, the plot, and even their jobs. Couldn’t see the point to anything. What else could the masters of the old white world do but redouble their efforts, intensify their drives for security, heighten and perfect their powers? But the more they struggled to adapt and survive, the faster the climate seemed to change. The more they tried to regain control, the more their narrative lost its thread; the closer they came to living the dream, the 4 weaker their grasp on power became. Was it even possible that, 4 regardless of their labors, their hopes and dreams, they had been “the sex organs of the machine world, as the bee of the plant world, enabling it to fecundate and to evolve ever new forms”? All that time, the effort and the pain, the trouble they had taken to maintain control.
“And Instead they watch the machines multiply that push them little by little beyond the limits of their nature. And they are sent back to their mountain tops, while the machines progressively populate the earth. Soon engendering man as their eplphenomenon. ”

Luce Irigaray, Marine Lover

cultures
Nothing takes the credit—or the blame—for either the runaway tendencies at work or the attempts to regulate them. Political struggles and ideologies have not been incidental to these shifts, but cultures and the changes they undergo are far too complex to be attributed to attempts to make them happen or hold them back. This is not because some other determination has come into play. If anything does emerge from the complexity of current shifts, it is the realization that cultures cannot be shaped or determined by any single hand or determining factor. Even conceptions of change have changed. Revolution has been revolutionized. There is no center of operations, no organizing core; there are no defining causes, overriding reasons, fundamental bases, no starting points or prime movers; no easy explanations, straightforward narratives, simple accounts, or balanced books. Any attempt to deal with some particular development immediately opens onto them all.
The impossibility of getting a grip, and grasping the changes underway is itself one of the most disturbing effects to emerge from the current mood of cultural change. The prospect of being in a position to know, and preferably control, changes manifest on the social scale has been crucial to modern conceptions of what used to be called man’s place in the grand scheme of things. Technology itself was supposed to be a vital means of exerting this explanatory and organizational power. But the revolutions in telecommunications, media, intelligence gathering, and information processing they unleashed have coincided with an unprecedented sense of disorder and unease,

not only in societies, states, economies, families, sexes, but also in species, bodies, brains, weather patterns, ecological systems. There is turbulence at so many scales that reality itself seems suddenly on edge. Centers are subsumed by peripheries, mainstreams overwhelmed by their backwaters, cores eroded by the skins which were once supposed to be protecting them. Organizers have found themselves eaten up by whatever they were trying to organize. Master copies lose their mastery, and everything valued for its size and strength finds itself overrun by microprocessings once supposed too small and insignificant to count.

nets
Of all the media and machines to have emerged in the late twentieth century, the Net has been taken to epitomize the shape of this new distributed nonlinear world. With no limit to the number of names which can be used, one individual can become a population explosion on the Net: many sexes, many species. Back on paper, there’s no limit to the games which can be played in cyberspace. Access to a terminal is also access to resources which were once restricted to those with the right face, accent, race, sex, none of which now need be declared. Using the Net quickly became a matter of surfing, a channel- hopping mode facilitated and demanded by information which is no longer bound together in linear texts or library classifications, but instead needs to be laterally traversed.
As the system began to spill out into wider academic usage over the course of the next twenty years, other networks also emerged. Businesses developed local, and then wide area net-

works; commercial on-line services appeared; electronic mail and bulletin boards proliferated alongside fanzines and the samizdat press. While the network was doubling in size every year, the screens were gray, the options limited, and the number of users relatively small until the late 1980s. Access was hardly limited to students, hackers, and academics, but certain skills and commitments to computing were prerequisites of any tangible input into the system, and the users of the network occupied a strange frontline between state institutions and anarchic private use. In the wake of a massive expansion of the Net, the arrival of cybercafes, public terminals, falling costs, and a complex of other economic and cultural tendencies, use of the Net has grown not only in the West but in almost two hundred countries of the world. Usenet gives readers and writers access to thousands of articles in thousands of threads in vast popula- tions of newsgroup conversations, continually adding to themselves and fading out of use. On-line worlds scrolled down the screens in IRC (Internet Relay Chat) networks, MUDs (Multi- User Dungeons, or Domains), and MOOs (MUDs Object Oriented), where .softbots—software robots—and pseudonymous users interact in labyrinthine virtual worlds. With the development of the World Wide Web, a user-friendly, interactive, multimedia interface which uses Hypertext Mar^p T.angnogp (HTML) to map and interlink the information on the screen to another, and in principle, any other site, the Net gained both a gleaming corporate mall, and also a degree of interconnectivity which has continually drawn more computers, pages, links, users, and characters into a network which soon hosted galleries, libraries, shopping malls, company showcases, S&M dungeons, university departments, personal diaries, fanzines . . . every page linked to at least one other, sometimes hundreds, and always proliferating.

The Net has not caught up with the more expansive hopes of unfettered, free-flowing information which were once attached to it. But the technical potential it opens up comes close to the enormous system of lateral cross-referencing which the hypertext networks Ted Nelson first named Xanadu in the 1960s, and the system Vannevar Bush called the memex in the 1940s. Both these conceptions were far more interactive than the system-of the mid-1990s allows. The user of Bush's imagined system left “a trail ... of interest through the maze of materials available,” adding links and connections, inserting passages, and making routes through an immense virtual library whose composition continually shifts as a consequence of the activity of those who are using it. Ted Nelson’s envisaged system, which, to some extent, has been realized by the World Wide Web, has the enormous advantage of facilitating this same level of influence with the introduction of (very) small payments of electronic cash for the use of material on specific sites. With the flat-rate subscription system currently in place, links have to be deliberately made and do not, as with pathways across a field of grass, emerge from the sheer force of numbers making them.
As well as potentially facilitating new modes of information circulation, this grass-roots commerce poses great threats to the corporate interests currently in play. But if large-scale commercial activity tends to turn the Net into a shopping mall, it had its beginnings in 1969 as ARPAnet, a U.S. military defense project which quickly joined cockroaches on the short list of those most likely to survive nuclear attack. Developed at the height of the cold war, the Net had also learned from the Viet Cong, whose networks of tunnels and guerrilla techniques had forced a centralized U.S. military machine to adopt unprecedented tactics of distribution and dispersal in response. These military influences on the Net are betrayed in its messages’

ability to route and reroute themselves, hunting for ways round obstacles, seeking out shortcuts and hidden passages, continually requisitioning supplies and hitching as many rides as possible. The network and its traffic are so dispersed that any damage to one part of the system, or even a particular message, will have litde effect on the whole machinery. Information is transmitted in packets which rarely take the same route twice, and may take many different routes to a destination at which they weave themselves together again. Maps of the network cannot be stolen, not because they are closely guarded, but because there is no definitive terrain. Any map adds to the network and is always already obsolete.
The growth of the Net has been continuous with the way it works. No central hub or command structure has constructed it, and its emergence has been that of a parasite, rather than an organizing host. It has installed none of the hardware on which it works, simply hitching a largely free ride on existing computers, networks, switching systems, telephone lines. This was one of the first systems to present itself as a multiplicitous. bottom-up, piecemeal, self-organizing network which, apart 'Irom a quo^rtY'ofTnilitarv influence, government censorship, and corporate power, could be seen to be emerging without any centralized control. Not that such lateral networks or boot- strapped systems have “an irresistible revolutionary calling . . .” The leading corporations are now expending all their energies on processes of molecularization and virtualization, continually downsizing and turning themselves into flattened horizontal operations and, in effect, getting all such modes of activity on their side. No matter how spontaneous their emergence, self-organizing systems are back in organizational mode as soon as they have organized themselves.
This conflict is inscribed in the double-edged quality of

the word itself. Technology is both a question of logic, the long arm of the law, logos, “the faculty which distinguishes parts (‘on the one hand and^n the other hand’V” and also a mn**™- dlf skills, digits(j5peeds>, and rhythms of techno, engineerings which run with “a completely other distrih»ri<™ •which must h** nomadic, a nomad nomos, without property, enclosure or measure.” The same amhival<»nrp y Scribed in the zeros and ones of computer code. These bits of code are themselves derived from two entirely different sources, and terms: the binary and the digital, or the symbols of a logical identity which does indeed put everything on one hand or the other, and the digits of mathematics, full of intensive potential which are not counted-hv hand but on the fingers and, sure enough, arrange themselves in pieces of eight rather than binary pairs.
The techno and the digital are never perceived to run free of the coordinating eyes and hands of logic and its binary codes. But logic is nothing without their virtual plane. They are the infrastructure to its superstructure: not another order of things, but another mode of operations altogether, the matters of a distribution which is “demonic rather than divine, since it is a peculiarity of demons to operate in the intervals between the gods’ fields of action . . . thereby confounding the boundaries between properties.”
“You know I am a d-------------d ODD anlmall And as my mother
often says, she never has quite yet made up her mind If It Is the Devil or Angel that watches peculiarly over me; only that It IS one or the other, without doubt!
“(And for my part, I am quite Indifferent which.)”
Ada Lovelace, December 1841

digits
The vast majority of what are now assumed to be the West’s mathematical terms and axioms are either Arabic or Hindu. The word algebra is taken from the tide of the Al-gebr we’l mukabala, a book written in the ninth century by one of the most sophisticated Arab mathematicians. Alkarismi. who gave his name to the algorithm. The Al-gebr is in turn based on the work of Brahmagupta, a Hindu mathematician and astronomer who, in the seventh century, consolidated India’s sophisticated but unwieldy arithmetical principles in the form of twenty basic processes “essential to all who wish to be calculators.”
The system of notation and calculation which emerged from this fusion of Hindu and Arabic arithmetic was introduced to the West by both Arabic scholars and Asian traders. Indian arithmetic had already been carried by merchants as far west as Baghdad, and Alkarismi’s own arithmetical prowess is said to have resulted from his own travels in India. It was a great spacesaving device when compared to its far more cumbersome counterparts, most of which had been developed in conjunction with the abacus, a device which was unknown to Hindu culture, but had been widely used in the Egyptian, Babylonian, Greek, and Roman worlds. While the abacus had removed the need to process and store numbers in concise written form, India had developed a sophisticated system of notation which it used both to calculate and record results.
India had effectively developed a written abacus, using its written numbers in place of pebbles t>r beads, giving them the same signs regardless of the positions they assumed, and using 0

or a dot to indicate an empty column of the virtual abacus. Whereas abacists used completely different signs for numbers with different place values—such as I for one and X for ten in Roman numerals—the Hindu system could use the same digit—1—to compose one, ten, hundred, and an obviously vast number of other numbers.
“It is India that gave us the ingenious method of earpness- ine all numbers bv means of ten symbols.” wrote Pierre-Simon Laplace, “each symbol receiving a value of position as well as an absolute value.5’ In other words, the numbers were both cardinal and ordinal, each expressing its place in the string (first, . second, third etc.), as well as a value specific to itself. Unlike the Roman numerals, in which two is simply two ones collected together, the Sanskrit two is a qualitatively different number to one, an entity or character in its own right. As Laplace points out, the new arithmetic was “a profound and important idea which appears so simple to us now that we ip-note its true merit, but its very simplicity, the great ease which it has lent to all computations, puts our arithmerir in the front rank of useful inventions.” Although this statement about “our-arithmetic” subtly appropriates the new system as one of the West’s “inventions,” Laplace continues, “We shall appreciate the grandeur of this achievement when we remember that it escaped the genius of Archimedes and Apollonius, two of the greatest men produced by antiquity.”
“Certainly my troops must consist of numbers, or they can have no existence at all, & would cease to be the particular sort of troops In question.—But then what are these numbers? There Is a riddle."

Ada Lovelace

To a Europe still counting in bundles of Roman sticks, this new
~~ mm
arithmetic, with its alien Sanskrit figures, was an infidel system which posed an extraordinary threat to the stability of the Western world. Although the Eastern system is as widely used as the alphabet today, it was not until the Renaissance that Europe’s new merchants overcame the opposition of the Church to the introduction of the numbers 123456789 and 0. One of the first texts on the new arithmetic—which was also one of the first books in the English language. The Craft of Nombrynge (ca. 1300)—was composed while edicts forbidding the use of the numbers were still being issued in Florence. By 1478, the first manual on the new arithmetic had been printed in Italy on one of the then brand-new Gutenberg presses. “Numeration is the representation of numbers by figures,” it explained. “This is done by means of ten letters or figures as here shown, l.,2.,3.,4.,5.,6.,7.,8.,9.,0. Of these the first figure, 1, is not called a number, but the source of number. The tenth figure, 0, is called cipher or ‘nulla,’ i.e. the figure of nothing, since by itself it has no value, although when joined with others it increases their value.”
In addition to its numbers, the new arithmetic introduced negative numbers and irrational numbers, as well as zero and the decimal point. These were features crucial to the networks of banking and trade which became increasingly important to European culture in the fifteenth century. Trade, which is now widely assumed to be a peculiarly Western invention, was then as new to Europe as these numbers, and there is little doubt that even the simple matters of keeping accounts, setting prices, doing deals, and working with large numbers were simply impossible with Roman numerals. This was not the least of the reasons why the infidel arith-

metic threatened a Christian culture which, even now, demurs at the thought of Sunday trade.
The one of the new arithmetic was also very different to the old straight line which had figured as both a number and the ninth letter of the Roman alphabet. Western philosophy is supposed to be an elucidation and confirmation of the unity of one, a number which had been held in great esteem long before there was one male god. To the ancient Greeks, one was everything and anything, first and last, best and good, universal, unified. It was the symbol of existence, identity, and being. Stricdy speaking, there was nothing else. To be anything at all was to be one.

For all its dreams of self-sufficiency, even one has always needed another of some kind. But since it was the only one as well, it had to ensure that any other options were merely impoverished variations on its theme. The Greeks recognized many as andternative to one but, like the Romans,, even, this was conceived as a collection of many ones. Derived from the Greek term iota, and closely related to atom and jot, this one was taken to symbolize any individuated and indivisible entity, whereas the Sanskrit one functioned in relation to the other eight digits of the Hindu system. But one closely resembled the old Roman line and was easily subsumed into the old paradigm. Any differences between the two were more or less erased.
Zero posed a very different threat. When it first appeared •0
in the new string of infidel figures, the old Church fathers did everything to keep it out of a world which then revolved around one and its multiples: one God, one truth, one way, one one. The numbers 2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9 were subversive enough, but zero was unthinkable. If it wasn’t one of something, it couldn’t be allowed. Then again, the Church could hardly be seen to protest too much about something that, as far as they could see,

wasn’t really there at all. If zero was nothing, it should be as easy to absorb as the Sanskrit one had been. And, sure enough, zero was appropriated as a sign of absence, nonbeing, and nothingness. The ancient unity of something_and-nathmg-waS-apparently undisturbed.

holes
“■Somewhere there Is a siren. Her green body Is covered with scales. Her face Is bare. The undersides of her arms are a rosy colour. Sometimes she begins to sing. The women say that of her song nothing Is to be heard but a continuous 0. That Is why this song evokes for them, like everything that recalls the 0, the zero or the circle, the vulval ring."
Monique Wlttig, Les GuSrIIISres
Having escaped the rigors of an education which would have taught her not to ask such things, Ada wandered off, around and about, and wondered about zero too. One of her earliest enquiries to Augustus De Morgan, her tutor in mathematics, concerned the status of this figure. Did it exist as a “thing,” she asked? Was it something, or nothing, or something else again? He gave her an intriguing answer. “Zero is something, ” he explained, “though not some quantity, which is what you here mean by thing.”
“She does not set herself up as one, as a (single) female unit. She Is not closed up or around one single truth or essence. The essence of a truth remains foreign to her. She neither has nor Is a being. And she does not oppose a feminine truth to a

masculine truth ... the female sex takes place by embracing Itself, by endlessly sharing and exchanging Its lips, Its edges, Its borders, and their ‘content,’ as It ceaselessly becomes other, no stability of essence Is proper to her."
Luce IHgaray, Speculum of the Other Woman
Zero may mean nothing to the Western world, but this has nothing to do with the way it works. It was certainly crucial to the functioning of the Analytical Engine, a machine which, according to Menabrea, used an “occult principle of change” which allowed it to “provide for singular values.” The Engine was able to deal with those functions “which necessarily change in nature when they pass through zero or infinity, or whose values cannot be admitted when they pass these limits. When such cases present themselves, the machine is able, by means of a bell, to give notice that the passage through zero or infinity is taking place, and it then stops until the attendant has again set it in action for whatever process it may next be desired to perform. If this process has been foreseen, then the machine instead of ringing, will so dispose itself as to present Che new .cards which have relation to the operation that is to succeed the passage through zero and infinity.” It is the possibility of this passage which allows the machine “arbitrarily to change its processes at any moment, on the occurrence of any specified contingency.” >
In terms of the pragmatic roles they play, the zeros and ones of machine code do far more than hark back to the binaries their logical symbols represent. If zero is supposed to signify a hole, a space, or a missing piece, and one \ is the sign of positivity, digital machines turn these binaries around. In both electronic systems and the punched cards of weaving machines, a hole is one, and a blank is zero, in which case there are two

missing elements, if missing is where either can be said to go. No longer a world of ones and not-ones, or something and nothing, thing and gap, but rather not-holes and holes, not- nothing and nothing, gap and not-gap. Not that this matters any more than the initial dualism between one and a zero conceived as not-one. Zero was always something very different horn the sign which has emerged from the West’s inability to deal with anything which, like zero, is neither something in particular nor nothing at all. And it is certainly the case that, witH oF vhthout the signs that represent them as inert negativities, holes themselves are never simply absences of positive things. This is a purely psychoanalytical myth. For Deleuze and Guattari, it is not even enough “to say that intense and moving particles pass through holes: a hole is just as much a particle as what passes through it . . Holes are not absences, spaces where there should be something else. “Flying anuses, speeding vaginas, there is no castration.” Adrift in the doped lattices of a silicon crystal, a hole is a positive particle before it is the absence of a negatively charged electron, and the movement of electrons toward the positive terminal is also a flow of holes streaming back the other way. Holes are charged particles running in reverse. For the quantum physicist, “holes are not the absence of particles but particles traveling faster than the speed of light.”
“Transpierce the mountains Instead of scaling them, excavate the land Instead of straltlng It, bore holes In space Instead of keeping It smooth, turn the earth Into swIss cheese.”
Gllles Deleuze and Felix Guattari. A Thousand Plateaus

cyborg manifestos

For years, decades, centuries, it seemed as though women were lagging behind the front runners of the human race, struggling to win the rights attained by men, suffering for want of the status which full membership of the species would supposedly have given them. And as long as human was the only thing to be, women have had litde option but to pursue the possibility of gaining frill membership of the species “with a view to winning back their own organism, their own history, their own subjectivity.” But this is a strategy which “does not function without drying up a spring or stopping a flow.” And there are processes of parallel emergence, noncausal connections and simultaneous developments which suggest that sexual relations continually shift in sympathy with changes to the ways many other aspects of the world work. If Simone de Beauvoir’s Second Sex found itself compelled to call for “men and women” to “univocally affirm their brotherhood” in 1949, this was also the point at which the first sex began to find itself subsumed by self-organizing tendencies beyond its ken or its control. By 1969, when Monique Wittig published Les GuirilUres, these tendencies were emerging as networks which didn’t even try to live up to the existing definitions of what it was to be a proper one of anything at all. And by the 1970s, when Luce Iriaaray wrote This Sex Which Is Not One, fluid complexities were giving a world which had once revolved around ones and others a dynamic which obsolesced the possibility of being one of anything at all.
As personal computers, samplers, and cyberpunk narratives proliferated in the mid-1980s, Donna Haraway’s cyborgs.

were writing manifestos of their own. “Bv the late twentieth century,” they declared, “our time, a mythic time, we are all chimeras, theorized and fabricated hybrids of machine and or- ganism; in short, we are all cyborgs.” And while the shiny ^screens of tKeTate twentieth century continued to present themselves as clean-living products of the straight white lines of a peculiarly man-made world, Haraway’s text excited a wave of subversive female enthusiasm for the new networks and machines. In the early 1990s, a cyberfeminist manifesto appeared on an Australian billboard and declared. “The clitoris is a direct
•Wt "
line to the matrix,” a line which refers to both the womb— matrix is the Latin term, just as hystera is the Greek—and the abstract networks of communication which were increasingly assembling themselves.
“Vbu may not encounter ALL NEW GEN as she has many guises. But, do not fear, she Is always In the matrix, an omnipresent Intelligence, anarcho cvber terrorist acting as a virus of the new world disorder."
VNS Matrix

They say she wears “different veils according to the historic period.” They say her “original attributes and epithets were so numerous ... in the hieroglyphics she is called ‘the many- named,’ ‘the thousand-named’ . . . ‘the myriad-named.’ ” They say, “the future is unmanned.” They say, “let those who call for a new language first learn violence. They say, let those who want to change the world first seize all the rifles. They say that they are starting from zero. They say that a new world is beginning.” They say, “if machines, even the machines of theory, can arouse themselves, why not women?”

programming language
“It Is already getting around—at what rate? In what contexts? In spite of what resistances?—that women diffuse themselves according to modalities scarcely compatible with the framework of the ruling symbolics. Which doesn't happen without causing some turbulence, we might even say whirlwinds, that ought to be reconfined within solid walls of principle, to keep them from spreading to Infinity ..."
Luce Irlgaray, This Sex Which Is Not One
In May 1979, Commander John D. Cooper came up with a name which the United States Department of Defense’s High Order Language Working Group (HOLWG) could accept for their new programming language: Ada, chosen “in honor of an obscure but talented mathematician, Ada, Countess of Lovelace.” When HOLWG approached the Earl of Lytton, one of Ada’s descendants, for permission to use the name, he “was immediately enthsiasdc about the idea and pointed out that the letters ‘Ada’ stood ‘right in the middle of “radar.”

shuttle systems
There is always a point at which, as Freud admits, “our material—for some incomprehensible reason—becomes far more obscure and foil of gaps.” And, as it happens, Freud’s weaving women had made rather more than a small and debatable con-

tribution to his great narrative of inventions and discoveries. Far more than a big and certain one as well. It is their micro- processes which underlie it all: the spindle and the wheel used in spinning yarn are the basis of all later axles, wheels, and rotations; the interlaced threads of the loom compose the most abstract processes of fabrication. Textiles themselves are very literally the softwares linings of all technology.
String, which has been dated to 20,000 b.c., is thought to be the earliest manufactured thread and crucial to “taking the world to human will and ingenuity,” not least because it is such multipurpose material. It can be used for carrying, holding, tying, and trapping, and has even been described as “the unseen weapon that allowed the human race to conquer the earth. ’ ’ Textiles underlie the great canvases of Western art, and even the materials of writing. Paper now tends to be made from wood, but it too was woven in its early form, produced from the dense interlacing of natural fibers. The Chinese, with whom the production of paper is thought to have begun some 2,000 years ago, used bamboo, rags, and old fishing nets as their basic materials; papyrus, from which the word paper is itself derived, was used in ancient Egypt, and later Arab cultures used the same flax from which linen is produced. Wood pulp gradually took over from the rags which Europe used until the nineteenth century, and most paper is now produced from fibers which are pulped and bleached, washed and dried, and then filtered onto a mesh and compressed into a fine felt.
Evidence of sophisticated textile production dates to 6,000 B.C. in the southeast regions of Europe, and in Hungary there is evidence that warp-weighted looms were producing designs of extraordinary extravagance from at least 5,000 B.c. Archaeological investigations suggest that from at least the fourth millennium B.C. Egyptian women were weaving linen on horizontal

looms, sometimes with some two hundred threads per inch, and capable of producing cloths as wide as nine feet and seventy-five feet long. Circular warps, facilitating the production of seamless tubes for clothing, and tapestry looms, able to weave the dense complications of images visible in weft threads so closely woven as to completely conceal the warps, were also in use in ancient Egypt where, long before individual artisans stamped their work with their own signatures, trademarks and logos were woven in to indicate the workshop in which cloths had been produced. Cloths were used as early currency, and fine linens were as valuable as precious metals and stones. In China, where the spinning wheel is thought to have first turned, sophisticated drawlooms had woven designs which used thousands of different warps at least two and a half thousand years before such machines were developed in the West.
It may be a bare necessity of life, but textiles work always goes far beyond the clothing and shelter of the family. In terms of quality, sophistication, and sheer quantity, the production of textiles always seems to put some kind of surplus in play. The production of “homespun” yarn and doth was one of the first cottage industries, pin money was women’s earliest source of independent cash, and women were selling surplus yarn and cloth and working as small-scale entrepreneurs long before the emergence of factories, organized patterns of trade, and any of the mechanisms which now define the textiles industry. Even when cloths and clothes can be bought off the rack, women continue to absorb themselves in fibrous fabrications.
There is an obsessive, addictive quality to the spinning of yarn and the weaving of cloth; a temptation to get fixated and locked in to processes which run away with themselves and those drawn into them. Even in cultures assumed to be subsistence economies, women who did only as much cooking,

dialling, and childcare as was necessary tended to go into overdrive when it came to spinning and weaving cloth, producing far more than was required to clothe and furnish the family home. With time and raw materials on their hands, even “Neolithic women were investing large amounts of extra time into their textile work, far beyond pure utility,” suggesting that not everything was hand to mouth. These prehistoric weavers seem to have produced cloths of extraordinary complexity, woven with ornate designs far in excess of the brute demand for simple cloth. And wherever this tendency to elaboration emerged, it fed into a continual exploration of new techniques of dyeing, color combination, combing, spinning, and all the complications of weaving itself.
Even in Europe there had been several early and sophisticated innovations. Drawlooms had been developed in the Middle Ages, and while many of Leonardo da Vinci’s “machines for spinning, weaving, twisting hemp, trimming felt, and making needles” were never made, he certainly introduced the flyer and bobbin which brought tension control to the spinning wheel. Unlike “the spinster using the older wheel,” she now “slackened her hold on the yarn to allow it to be wound on to the bobbin as it was being twisted.”
It is often said that Leonardo’s sixteenth-century work anticipated the industrial revolution “in the sense that his ‘machines’ (including tools, musical instruments, and weapons) all aspired toward systemic automation.” But it was his intuition that textiles machines were “more useful, profitable, and perfect than the printing press” which really placed him ahead of his time. If printing had spread across the modern world, textiles led the frantic industrialization of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. “Like the most humble cultural assets, textiles incessantly moved about, took root in new re-

gions . . The first manufactory was a silk mill on an island in the Derwent near Derby built early in a century which also saw the introduction of the spinning jenny, the water frame, the spinning mule, the flying shuttle, the witches’ loom, and the power loom. A spiral of “inventions in both spinning and weaving (interacting and mutually stimulating) had attracted capital, concentrated labour, increased output and swollen imports and exports.” This was cloth capitalism, a runaway process which quite literally changed the world. In the 1850s, it was said that “if Providence had never planted the cotton shrub those majestic masses of men which stretch, like a living zone, through our central districts, would have felt no existence; and the magic impulse which has been felt ... in every department of national energy, our literature, our laws, our social condition, our political institutions, making us almost a new people, would never have been communicated.” Textiles had not merely changed the world: they seemed to have mutated its occupants as well. ‘‘Almost a new people ...” “I was surprised at the place but more so at the people,” wrote one commentator of Birmingham, the site of the first cotton-spinning mill. “They were a species I had never seen.”
While the industrial revolution is supposed to have made the break between handheld tools and supervised machines, the handmade and the mass-produced, the introduction of technology to more primitive textiles techniques is both a break with the old ways and a continuation of the lines on which the women were already at work. Even before its mechanization, the loom was described as the “most complex human engine of them all,” not least because of the extent to which it “reduced everything to simple actions: the alternate movement of the feet worked the pedals, raising half the threads of the warp and then the other, while the hands threw the shuttle carrying the thread

of the woof.” When John Heathcote, who patented a lace- making machine just after Jacquard built his loom, first saw “a woman working on a pillow, with so many bobbins that it seemed altogether a maze,” his impression was that lace was a “heap of chaotic material.” In an attempt to unravel the mystery, he “drew a thread, which happened to draw for an inch or two longitudinally straight, then started off diagonally. The next drew out straight. Then others drew out in various directions. Out of four threads concurring to make a mesh, two passed one way, the third another and the fourth another still. But at length I found they were in fact used in an orderly manner . . .” It was then a matter of producing “a fabric which was an exact imitation of the thread movements of handmade lace.” This is both the ordering of chaos, and also how its networks replicate themselves.
There were other spin-offs from textiles too. The weaving of complex designs demands far more than one pair of hands, and textiles production tends to be communal, sociable work allowing plenty of occasion for gossip and chat. Weaving was already multimedia: singing, chanting, telling stories, dancing, and playing games as they work, spinsters, weavers, and needle- workers were literally networkers as well. It seems that “the women of prehistoric Europe gathered at one another’s houses to spin, sew, weave, and have fellowship.” Spinning yarns, fabricating fictions, fashioning fashions . . . : the textures of woven cloth functioned as means of communication and information storage long before anything was written down. “How do we know this? From the cloth itself.” This is not only because, like writing and other visual arts,Nveaving is often “used to mark or announce information” and “a imiemonic device to record events and other data.” Textiles doi communicate in terms of the images which appear on the righfside of the cloth,

but this is only the most superficial sense in which they process and store data. Because there is no difference between the process of weaving and the woven design, cloths persist as records of the processes which fed into their production: how many women worked on them, the techniques they used, the skills they employed. The visible pattern is integral to the process which produced it; the program and the pattern are continuous.
Information can be stored in cloth by means of the mean- ingfid messages and images which are later produced by the pen and the paintbrush, but data can also be woven in far more pragmatic and immediate ways. A piece of work so absorbing as a cloth is saturated with the thoughts of the people who produced it, each of whom can flash straight back to whatever they were thinking as they worked. Like Proust’s madeleines, it carries memories of an intensity which completely escapes the written word. Cloths were also woven “to ‘invoke magic’—to protect, to secure fertility and riches, to divine the future, perhaps even to curse,” and in this sense the weaving of spells is far more than a metaphorical device. “The weaver, chose warp threads of red wool for her work, 24 spun one direction, 24 spun the other way. She divided the bunch spun one way into 3 sets of 8, and the other bunch into 4 sets of 6, and alternated them. All this is perhaps perfectly innocent, but ...”
If the weaving of such magical spells gives priority to the process over the completion of a task, this tendency is implicit in the production of all textiles. Stripes and checks are among the most basic of colored and textured designs which can be woven in. Both are implicit in' the grids of the woven cloth itself. Slightly more complex, but equally integral to the basic web, are the lozenges, or diamonds, still common in weaves across the world. These open diamonds are said to indicate fertility and tend to decorate the aprons, skirts, and belts which

are themselves supposed to be the earliest forms of clothing. “These lozenges, usually with little curly hooks around the edge, rather graphically, if schematically, represent a woman’s vulva.” These images are quite unlike those which are later painted on the canvas or written on the page. The lozenge is emergent from the cloth, diagonal lines implicit in the grids of the weave. And even the most ornate and complex of woven designs retains this connection to the warps and wefts. When images are later painted, or written in the form of words on a page, patterns are imposed on the passive backdrop provided by the canvas or the page. But textile images are never imposed on the surface of the cloth: their patterns are always emergent from an active matrix, implicit in a web which makes them immanent to the processes from which they emerge.
As the frantic activities of generations of spinsters and weaving women makes abundandy clear, nothing stops when a particular piece of work has been finished off. Even when magical connections are not explicidy invoked, the finished cloth, unlike the finished painting or the text, is almost incidental in relation to the processes of its production. The only incentive to cast off seems to be the chance completion provides to start again, throw another shutde, cast another spell.
As writing and other visual arts became the privileged bearers of memory and messages, weaving withdrew into its own screens. Both canvases and paper reduce the complexities of weaving to raw materials on which images and signs are imposed: the cloths from which woven patterns once emerged now become backcloths, passive matrices on which images are imposed and interpreted as if from on high. Images are no longer carried in the weave, but imprinted on its surface by the pens and brushes with which shutdes become superficial carriers of threads. Guided by the hand-eye coordinations of what

are now their male creators, patterns become as individuated and unique as their artists and authors. And whereas the weave was once both the process and the product, the woven stuff, images are now separated out from matrices to which they had been immanent. The artist sees only the surface of a web which is covered as he works; the paper on which authors now look down has no say in the writing it supports.
The processes themselves become dematerialized as myths, legends, and metaphors. Ariadne’s thread, and the famous contest in which the divine Athena tore mortal Arachne’s weaving into shreds, are among the many mythical associations between women and webs, spinsters and spiders, spinning yarns and storylines. For the Greeks, the Fates, the Moirai, were three spinsters—Klotho, Lachesis, and Atropos—who produced, allotted, and broke the delicate contingency of the thread of life. In the folktales of Europe, spindles become magic wands, Fates become fairies, and women are abandoned or rescued from impossible spinning and weaving tasks by supernatural entities, godmothers and crones who transform piles of flax into fine linen by means more magical than weaving itself, as in “Rum- pelstiltskin,” “The Three Spinsters,” and “The Sleeping Beauty.” “European folktales are frill of references to the making of magical garments, especially girdles, in which the magic seems to be inherent in the weaving, not merely in special decoration.”
As for the fabrics which persist: evaluated in these visual terms, their checks and diagonals, diamonds and stripes become insignificant matters of repeating detail. This is why Freud had gazed at work which was so literally imperceptible to him. Struggling only to interpret the surface effects of Anna’s work as though he was looking at a painting or a text, the process of weaving eluded him: out of sight, out of mind, out of his world.

This was a process of disarmament which automation should have made complete. But if textiles appear to lose touch with their weaving spells and spans of time, they also continue to fabricate the very screens with which they are concealed.
And because these are processes, they keep processing. “Behind the screen of representation,” weaving wends its way through even the media which supplant it. While paper has lost its associations with the woven fabrics with which it began, there are remnants of weaving in all writing: yarns continue to be spun, texts are still abbreviated textiles, and even grammar— glamor—and spelling retain an occult connectivity. Silkscreens, printing presses, stencils, photographic processes, and typewriters: by the end of the nineteenth century images, texts, and patterns of all kinds were being processed by machines which 6
still used matrices as means to their ends, but also repeated the 9
repeating patterns downgraded by the one-off work of art. And while all these modes of printing were taking technologies of representation to new heights, they were also moving on to the matrices of times in which these imprinting procedures would reconnect with the tactile depth of woven cloth.

casting on
Spinning is “a perilous craft” wrote Mircea Eliade. “The moon ‘spins’ Time and ‘weaves’ human lives. The Goddesses of Destiny are spinners.” When he looks at the seclusion of pubescent girls and menstruating women, often the occasion for the spinning of both actual and fictional yarns, he detects “an occult connection between the conception of the periodical creations of the world . . . and the ideas of Time and Destiny, on the

aa

one hand, and on the other, nocturnal work, women’s work, which has to be performed far horn the light of the sun and almost in secret. In some cultures, after the seclusion of the girls is ended they continue to meet in some old woman’s house to spin together.” And wherever spinning is ubiquitous, there is often “a permanent tension, and even conflict, between the groups of young spinning girls and the men’s secret societies. At night the men and their gods attack the spinning girls and destroy not only their work, but also their shuttles and weaving apparatus.”
If the psychoanalysts provide the only accounts of hysteria, the only records of the witch-hunting which swept three centuries of premodern society are written by the hunters and from their point of view. “The voices of the accused reach us strangled, altered, distorted; in many cases, they haven’t reached us at all.” What “really happened” has left the scene. Historians of witchcraft “have implicitly or explicidy derived the subject of their research from the interpretative categories of the demonologists, the judges or witnesses against the accused,” and “with very few exceptions,” most scholarly studies “have continued to concentrate almost exclusively on persecution, giving litde or no attention to the attitudes and behaviour of the persecuted.” Even feminist scholars have endorsed this approach. “Clearly,” writes Mary Daly of those on trial, “the supposed sexual fantasies of these women were (are) archetypi- cally male fantasies,” and the accused were nothing more than “projection screens for these hallucinations.”
If everything remaining of the witch cults is circumscribed by those who define and prosecute their crimes, anyone “declining to restrict himself to recording the results of this historical violence can find fragments, relatively immune from distortions, of the culture that the persecution set out to eradicate.”

The prosecution evidence is riddled with gaps: there are holes in the stories, twists to the plots. “Hence—for anyone unresigned to writing history for the nth time from the standpoint of the victors—the importance of the anomalies, the cracks that occasionally (albeit very rarely) appear in the documentation, undermining its coherence.”
All God’s children could be led astray, and many men met their deaths at the stake. As in the case of hysteria, the witches were not necessarily male. Persecutors testified to “the existence of an actual sect of female and male witches,” who “met at night, generally in solitary, places, in fields or on mountains. Sometimes, having anointed their bodies, they flew, arriving astride poles and broom sticks; sometimes they arrived on the backs of animals, or transformed into animals themselves . . .” But the Malleus Malejkarum, a fifteenth-century witch-hunter’s guide, also reported that “a greater number of witches is found in the fragile feminine sex than among men.” It argued that women were particularly predisposed to an “addiction to witchcraft” and considered them “to be of a different nature from men,” especially “as regards intellect, or the understanding of spiritual things.” Women were said to have “weak memories,” so that “it is a natural vice in them not to be disciplined, but to follow their own impulses without any sense of what is due; this is her whole study, and all that she keeps in her memory.”
The hunters tied themselves in terrible knots in an attempt to prove both that the witches’ activities were real enough to merit the prosecutions, and also that they were simply fantasies. “It cannot be admitted as true that certain wicked women, perverted by Satan and seduced by the illusions and phantasms of devils, do actually, as they believe and profess, ride in the night-time on certain beasts with Diana a goddess of the Pagans,

or with Herodias and an innumerable multitude of women, and in the untimely silence of night pass over immense tracts of land, and have to obey her in all things as their Mistress, etc.” Flight was simply a delusion: the witches didn’t really get in touch with the “innumerable multitude of women” they thought they met. They have believed they went hunting with Diana, Artemis, the Amazon queen, but it was all in the mind, it wasn’t happening. “Awakening from sleep, she began a long raving story of crossing seas and mountains, and she brought forth false responses. We denied her story, but she insisted upon it.” But, on the other hand, it was this tendency to ascribe the witches’ activities to “imagination and illusion” which also suggested that “they were really harmless.” And according to the Malleus Maleficarum, “For this reason many witches remain unpunished, to the great dispraise of the Creator, and to their own most heavy increase.”
“Under the repeated play of movement In the fingers a membrane grows between teem that seems to JoTn teem, then prolong them, until eventually It extends beyond the hand and descends along the mm. It grows. It lengthens. It gives the women a sort of wing on either side of their body. When they resemble giant bate, with transparent wings, one of teem comes up and, taking a kind of scissors from her belt, hastily divides tee two great flaps of silk. The fingers Immediately recommence their movement."

Monique Wlttlg, Les GuSrtlleres

flight
Ada Lovelace loved all forms of communication. She sometimes wrote several letters each day, and much of her surviving writing survives in this form. “Think what a delight,” she wrote in a letter when she learned that the electrical telegraph was coming to town in 1844. “Wheatstone says that sometimes friends hold conversations from one terminus to the other; that one can send for anyone to speak to one . . . Wonderful agent and invention!”
At the age of twelve she had entertained hopes of “writing a book of Flyology illustrated with plates,” and told her mother she would “be able to fly about with all your letters and messages and shall be able to carry them with much more speed than the post or any other terrestrial contrivances and to make the thing quite complete a part of the flying accoutrement shall be a letter bag, a small compass & a map which the two last articles will enable me to cut across the country by the most direct road without minding either mountains, hills, valleys, rivers, lakes &c, &c, &c. My book of Flyology shall contain a list of the advantages resulting from flying and it shall also contain a complete explanation of the anatomy of a bird.” Ada had plans to build her wings from paper or silk stiffened with wire, and also imagined “a thing in the shape of a horse with a steamengine in the inside so contrived as to move an immense pair of wings, fixed on the outside of the horse, in such a manner as to carry it up into the air while a person sits on its back.”

virtual aliens
"They speak together of the threat they have constituted towards authority, they tell how they were burned on pyres to prevent them from assembling In future.”
Monique Wlttig, Les GuSrilleres
The “overwhelming majority of electronics assembly jobs are occupied by young female workers on relatively low wages. In this respect, there are clear parallels with the situation in the textiles and clothing industries . . Most of these women do “assembly, the bonding of hair-thin wires to semiconductor chips, and the associated packaging. Though the work requires good eyesight and dexterity, little training is required . . .” Silicon Valley, Silicon Glen, Bangalore, Jakarta, Seoul, and Taipei provide dispersed networks of what U.S. multinationals call “virtual aliens” to fabricate the wafers, assemble the circuits, set up the keyboards and the screens, make the chips that make the chips that turn the computers on. They work in the global factory of the new transnationals: “On the west coast, Filipinas, Thais, Samoans, Mexicans and Vietnamese have made the electronics assembly line a microcosm of the global production process.”
Microprocessing has always been low status, poorly paid, sometimes dangerous. The terms and conditions of life in the factories and offices may be the smallest of improvements on those of compulsory service in the home. To those who already have room of their own, such moves seem paltry when compared to the rhetoric with which rights are declared and equal-

ity is sought. But these infiltrations won their spaces too. The work of these virtual aliens is the latest in the long and twisted line of microprocesses which emerge from a tangle of telephone lines, dials, operators, cables, tones, switches, and plugs; the keys, carriages, and cases of typewriters; the punched-card programs of calculators, pianolas, and looms; flying shuttles, spinning wheels. If she hasn’t had a hand in anything, her fingerprints are everywhere.
Left and right, base and superstructure, proletariat and bourgeoisie: like every reproductive system, industrial capitalism was itself supposed to function along the clear-cut binary lines. Often to the great detriment of the working class, the antagonism between forces and modes of production has been played out as a personal argument between the men: a matter of political consciousness, a struggle between bosses and workers, firms and unions, states and revolutionary cells. Organized and organizing factions have confronted each other as two sides of a split identity struggling to reconcile itself in some great climactic moment of revolution, and theories, critiques, and statistics have concentrated on male employment and the fate of the male worker who, together with modern capitalism and its critiques, has been largely engaged in matters of hand-eye coordination. Manual work and man’s work have been more or less synonymous, both for the workers—hired hands required to work with their hands, hand tools, handles, and other hand-size components—and the bosses—the ones who manage and manipulate the manufactories, and assume it’s all in their hands. This is the binary machine again: two hands and two sides of a game which is supposed to be conducted by another single hand: the invisible hand of capital, perfectly integrated with the supervising eye of the state.
Women, either their own or the proletariat’s proletarians,

as Engels called them, have been the least of the bourgeoisie’s concerns. Immersed in the low-status microprocesses of textiles production, secretarial work, and the production of miniature components, women are supposed to be the most inconspicuous and insignificant of cogs in the wheels of industry. Women have been off the productive map, out of the dialectical loop: no desire, no agency, not even the alienation of the male worker. Kept apart by the demands of home work, housework, and heterosexual monogamy, the women couldn’t get together to organize themselves after the fashion of the men. But for all the instabilities and crises it induced, the industrial proletariat was never the only carrier of revolutionary change, if it was ever such a thing at all. Perhaps its campaigns even served to distract bourgeois man from the really dangerous guerrillas in his midst, those apparently inconspicuous, well-behaved litde creatures who spent their time making lists, detailing procedures, typing, sorting, coding, folding, switching, transmitting, receiving, wrapping, packaging, licking the envelopes, fingers in the dll.
Women, children, and migrant workers have always been poorly paid, last in, and first out, a reservoir of labor which can be brought on stream as required. They are brought into the factories, the mills, and the new bureaucracies only in response to the demands of booming or war economies, and always under the strict supervision of their male superiors. Both the bosses and the male workers ensure that they are kept away from the important jobs. Managers treat them just like the men, only worse: they are paid, but they are paid less; their work is valued but not as highly as that of their male counterparts. As for their coworkers, the line adopted by America’s late-nineteenth century tobacco unions has been repeated time and again: “we have combated from its incipiency the movement of the introduction

of female labor in any capacity whatever,” they declared. “We can not drive the females out of the trade, but we can restrict this daily quota of labor through factory laws.”

cocoons
It has long been assumed in the Western world that technologies are basically tools, means to ends decided in advance by those who make them and put them to use. Whatever the particular purposes for which they are designed and employed, the overriding rationale has always been the effort to secure and extend the powers of those whose interests they are supposed to serve. And their interests have in turn been defined as the exercise of control over something variously defined as nature, the natural, the rest of the world. This crude model of the user and the used has legitimized the scientific projects, colonial adventures, sexual relations, and even the artistic endeavors of the modern world. It continues to inform the deployment of even the most complex machines.
But both man and his tools exist “only in relation to the interminglings they make possible or that make them possible.” The user and the used are merely the perceptible elements, the identifiable components which are thrown up by—and serve also to contain—far more complex processes. The weaver and the loom, the surfer and the Net: none of them are anything without the engineerings which they both capture and perpetuate.
These are processes which mock all grandiose attempts to name names and identify great moments of invention and dis-

covery. It is, as Braudel points out, “patient and monotonous efforts” which lead machinery on. Technical development is not only a matter of “the brisk changes we are a little too quick to label revolutions,” he writes, “but also the slow improvements in processes and tools . . . those innumberable actions which certainly have no innovating significance but which are the fruit of accumulating knowledge: the sailor fixing his ropes, the miner digging his gallery, the peasant behind his plough, the smith at his anvil.” These are the artisans, technicians, engineers whose work is more akin to “a collection of recipes drawn from craftsmen’s experience” than a tale of steady progress to some well-established end, and has “somehow or other evolved unhurriedly” by means of its own peculiar trials and errors, improvisations and accidents. .Until the publication oPBernard Forest’s The Engineer's Pocket Handbookjn 1755, engineering didn’t even have a name, and it has never quite found its place within the modern disciplines of sciences and arts.
While it dates from the engines of the mechanical age, engineering is not confined to the use and manufacture of machines in factories dedicated to the task. As its subsequent associations with electronics, chemicals, software, and genetics imply, it was merely passing through the tools and devices of the mechanical age. Nor is it a process which began at this point: engineering may have been newly defined among the levers, cogs, and automata of the eighteenth century, but the line on which it runs was not invented here.
Engineering travels on experimental routes which throw back to the skills of lost shamanic cultures, the trials and errors of alchemy, and brews condemned for witchcraft in the centuries before the Enlightenment. When Freud wrote his essay on Leonardo da Vinci, often said to be the West’s first engineer, it was not his ability to capture “the essence of femininity” in his

art which really interested the psychoanalyst. Even Leonardo’s penchant for hermaphrodites and the charges of homosexuality which, unlike a later engineer, he successfully denied, did not hold as much fascination as what Freud defines as his “alien interest—in experimentation.” This brought him “close to the despised alchemists, in whose laboratories experimental research had found some refuge at least in those unfavourable times.”
Such Renaissance hackers were on lines of enquiry entirely at odds with the Catholic Church. The “work of the ‘perspectors’ was still a matter of curiosity and artistic innovation” through the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and even subsequent engineering carries traces of these earlier, darker paths. In spite of the triumphs of the Victorian engineers, they 7 were still considered to have dirty hands. Pragmatism and tech- 9 nical skill were poor relations to the supposed creativity of sciences and arts, and the status of engineers fell far short of that accorded to those whose theories and visions they followed through. Engineers are not the authors of anything, but simply technicians and caretakers, carrying out instructions written elsewhere and looking after the machines entrusted to their care.
If they were never the masters of their destiny, engineers also do a great deal more than simply following orders from above. They may pay homage to the scientists and deliver their goods to the state, but “even today ‘wildcat’ activities of technical invention, sometimes related to bricolage, still go on outside the imperatives of scientific argumentation” and quite regardless Of social demand. This is not a straight but an “eccentric science,” wandering in its own queer streets and using “a hydraulic model, rather than being a theory of solids treating fluids as a special case.” It does not seek new theories, but new problems,

and emphasizes “becoming and heterogeneity, as opposed to the stable, the eternal, the identical, the constant.” And if both the sciences and the arts separate their authors from their instruments, engineering always remains embroiled in the entanglements of machines.
This is the diagonal route which feels a way through the binaries of one and the other, master and slave. Those who pick up on it are neither in charge of their materials nor are their materials enslaved to them. Neither random nor deliberate, this is a diagonal route, “determined in such a way as to follow a flow of matter, a machinic phylum,” a line which is “materiality, natural or artificial, and both simultaneously; it is matter in movement, in flux, in variation, matter as a conveyor of singularities and traits of expression. This has obvious consequences: namely, this matter-flow can only be followed. Doubtless, the operation that consists in following can be carried out in one pace: an artisan who planes follows the wood, the fibres of the wood, without changing location. But this way of following is only one particular sequence in a more general process. For artisans are obliged to follow in another way as well, in other words, to go find the wood where it lies, and to find the wood with the right kind of fibres . . .” They are “intuition in action.”
Culture and nature are scrambled with these inter- minglings. When sun-dried fibers are spun by hand, the spinsters’ fingers and the spinning wheel follow a trend set by the way the plants have already curled and died. When weavers interlace their threads, they jump into the middle of techniques which have already emerged among tangled lianas, interwoven leaves, twisted stems, bacterial mats, birds’ nes«.s and spiders’ webs, matted fleeces, fibers, and furs. When the silkworm goddess, variously known as Lei Zu and Lady Hsi-Ling, and said to

be the first sericulturist, farmed the worms and put their threads to human use, she too was prolonging the processes with which they were already weaving their cocoons. Folding, plying, multiplying threads: plaiting, weaving, and the spinning they imply draw on threads which are already assembling themselves in ways which far exceed any of Freud’s fantasies about his daughter’s pubic hair. And if Freud thought there was only one step involved in “making the threads adhere to one another,” the processes are rather more complex.
Long before the weaving can begin, threads must be combed and spun, plied and dyed, and measured out before they are wound onto the back beam, and through the rattle, or tension box. Stretched to the right tension, each warp thread must then be passed through the eyes of the heddles, the string or metal loops; then drawn between the harnesses; slayed through the dents in the reads; bunched, and finally tied to the apron. Combinations of color and texture must be worked out in advance: the order of the warps must be exacdy right, and the lifting sequence perfecdy prepared. Shutdes must be loaded with what might be a thousand different colors and threads, and the order of their traverse must be arranged. Only now can they begin to fly.
If this is the beginning of the process, everything is also over at this point. All the weaver now has to do is run the program woven in advance. The patterns are already as good as made. The fabrication might as well already be complete. The softwares are virtually real.

diagrams

Just before the outbreak of the Second World War, Alan Turing published a theoretical model of a machine which was to constitute the basis of all postwar computing. With a tape drive and a. computation unit, this hypothetical, abstract machine was capable of reading, erasing, and writing digits on a single line of type. It processed zeros and ones on a tape of infinite length which passed through the drive, and followed a series of basic commands.

The Turing machine
0
i
Config
i
move right config 1
move right config 2
Config
2
write 1 move right config 3
move right config 2
Config
3
move left config 4
move right config 3
Config
4
no move config 4
erase no move config 4
